Текст адаптирует Юлия Федорчук sono_io@inbox.ru 

Chapter 1
1. Once when I was six years old (когда-то, когда мне было шесть лет: досл. Я был шесть лет стар; «be – was, were – been» – быть) I saw a magnificent picture in a book (я видел замечательную картинку в книжке: «see – saw – seen» – видеть), called True Stories from Nature (называемой Правдивые Истории из Природы: «саll – called» – звать, называть, «from» – из), about the primeval forest (о древних лесах). It was a picture of a boa constrictor (это была картинка удава) in the act of swallowing an animal (глотающего животное: досл. в процессе глотания животного). Here is a copy of the drawing (это копия рисунка: досл. здесь есть копия; «here» – здесь).
 

1. Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing.
2. In the book it said (в книге говорилось: досл. это сказано; «say – said» – говорить): "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it (удавы глотают свою добычу целиком, не пережевывая: досл. без жевания её). After that they are not able to move (после этого они не в состоянии двигаться), and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion (и они спят в течение 6 месяцев, в которых они нуждаются для переваривания пищи: «through» – сквозь, «need» – нуждаться, сравни «to be in need of» – нуждаться в чем-то)." I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle (я задумался глубоко тогда над приключениями в джунглях: «ponder» – обдумывать). And after some work with a colored pencil (и поработав цветным каранлашем: досл. и после некоторой работы с цветным карандашем) I succeeded in making my first drawing (я нарисовал мой первый рисунок: досл. я преуспел в изготовлении; «make» – делать, «draw – drew – drawn» – рисовать, «drawing» – рисунок). My Drawing Number One (Номер Один). It looked like this (он выглядел так: досл. он выглядел, как это): 
 
2. In the book it said: "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it. After that they are not able to move, and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion." I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. And after some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing. My Drawing Number One. It looked like this:
3. I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups (я показал свое творение взрослым: «show – showed» – показывать), and asked them whether the drawing frightened them (и спросил у них, не пугает ли рисунок их). But they answered (ответили): "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat? (пугает? почему шляпа должна пугать: досл. почему должен кто-то один быть напуганным шляпой)". My drawing was not a picture of a hat (мой рисунок не был изображением шляпы). It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant (слон). But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it (но поскольку взрослые не были способны это понять: «since» – с тех пор), I made another drawing (я сделал другой рисунок): I drew the inside of the boa constrictor (удава изнутри: «inside» – то, что внутри), so that the grown-ups could see it clearly (так, чтобы взрослые могли видеть это ясно). They always need to have things explained (им всегда нужно объяснять: досл. они всегда нуждаются в том, чтобы вещи были объяснены; «explain – explained» – объяснять). My Drawing Number Two looked like this: 
 
3. I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the drawing frightened them. But they answered: "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat?" 
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant. But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it, I made another drawing: I drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the grown-ups could see it clearly. They always need to have things explained. My Drawing Number Two looked like this:
4. The grown-ups' response, this time (ответом взрослых на этот раз: досл. это время), was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors (был совет оставить мое рисование удавов: досл. было посоветовать мне отложить в сторону мое рисование удавов), whether from the inside or the outside (снаружи), and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar (и посвятить себя вместо этого географии, истории, арифметике и грамматике). That is why (вот почему), at the age of six (в возрасте 6 лет), I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter (я отказался от того, что могло бы быть замечательной карьерой художника: «give – gave – given» – давать, «give up» – отказываться). I had been disheartened by the failure (я огорчился провалом) of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves (сами), and it is tiresome for children (это (есть) утомительно для детей) to be always and forever explaining things to them (всегда и постоянно объяснять вещи для них: «always» – всегда, «forever» – навсегда). 
4. The grown-ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the outside, and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar. That is why, at the age of six, I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter. I had been disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves, and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
5. So then (поэтому) I chose another profession (я выбрал другую профессию: «choose – chose – chosen» – выбирать), and learned to pilot airplanes (и научился управлять самолётом: «learn – learned» – учиться). I have flown a little over all parts of the world (я летал понемногу над всеми частями мира: «a little» – немножко; «fly – flew – flown» – летать); and it is true (правда) that geography has been very useful to me (была очень полезна для меня: «useful» – полный полезности). At a glance (едва взглянув: «glance» – мимолётный взгляд) I can distinguish China from Arizona (я мог отличить Китай от Аризоны). If one gets lost in the night (если потеряешься ночью: досл. если один (кто-то) получит потерю ночью), such knowledge is valuable (такое знание очень ценно). 
In the course of this life (в течение моей жизни: «course» – направление, ход, курс) I have had a great many encounters with a great many people (я имел очень много встреч с очень многими людьми) who have been concerned with matters of consequence (которые заботились о последствиях). I have lived a great deal among grown-ups (я необычайно долго жил среди взрослых: «a great deal» – необычайно много). I have seen them intimately, close at hand (я видел их вблизи (близко), рядом под рукой). And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them (и это не улучшило моё мнение о них). 
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted (когда бы я не встречал одного из них, который казался мне в общем здравомыслящим: «at all» – в общем, «clear-sighted» – «чистовидящий»), I tried the experiment (я пробовал эксперимент) of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept (который всегда при мне: досл. который я всегда держал). I would try to find out (я пытался выяснить: «to find out» – выяснить), so, if this was a person of true understanding (была ли эта личность действительно понимающая: досл. личность правильного понимания). But, whoever it was (но кто бы это ни был), he, or she, would always say (он или она всегда говорили): "That is a hat (это шляпа)." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars (после этого я никогда не говорил с этим человеком об удавах, древних лесах, или звёздах). I would bring myself down to his level (я опускался до их уровня: досл. приносил себя вниз к их уровню). I would talk to him about bridge (бридж), and golf (гольф), and politics (политику), and neckties (галстуки). And the grown-up would be greatly pleased (очень довольны) to have met such a sensible man (что встретили такого понимающего человека: «meet – met» – встретить, «sensible» – чувствительный).
5. So then I chose another profession, and learned to pilot airplanes. I have flown a little over all parts of the world; and it is true that geography has been very useful to me. At a glance I can distinguish China from Arizona. If one gets lost in the night, such knowledge is valuable. 
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a great many people who have been concerned with matters of consequence. I have lived a great deal among grown-ups. I have seen them intimately, close at hand. And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them. 
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted, I tried the experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept. I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true understanding. But, whoever it was, he, or she, would always say: "That is a hat." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars. I would bring myself down to his level. I would talk to him about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties. And the grown-up would be greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man. 
 
Chapter 2
1. So I lived my life alone (так я и жил мою жизнь один: «live – lived» – жить), without anyone that I could really talk to (без кого-то, с кем я действительно мог поговорить: «can – could» – мочь, «talked to» – говорить с кем-то), until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago (пока не потерпел крушение в Сахаре, шесть лет назад: досл. пока не имел аварию с моим самолётом в Пустыне Сахара). Something  was broken in my engine (что-то поломалось в моём двигателе: «brake – broke – broken» – биться, ломаться, «some + thing» – какая-то вещь = что-то). And as (поскольку) I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers (ни механика, ни пассажиров: «neither… nor» – ни… ни), I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone (я взялся за ремонт сам: досл. я взял себя попытаться (устранить) тяжёлый ремонт весь (совсем) один; «set to» – взяться (за работу)). It was a question of life or death (вопрос жизни и смерти) for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week (я имел едва ли достаточно питьевой воды до конца недели). 
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand (первую ночь, тогда, я пошёл спать на песке), a thousand miles from any human habitation (за тысячу миль от какого-либо человеческого поселения: «to habituate» – обитать). I was more isolated (я был более изолирован) than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean (чем потерпевший крушение моряк на плоту посреди океана: «shipwrecked» = «ship»+«wrecked»= «корабль»+ «повреждённый», «raft» – плот). Thus (поэтому) you can imagine (представить) my amazement (изумление), at sunrise (на заре: «sunrise»= «sun»+ «rise» = «солнце»+ «вставать, подниматься»), when I was awakened by an odd little voice (когда я был разбужен странным голоском: «little voice» – маленький голос). It said (сказал):
"If you please - draw me a sheep! (будь так добр – нарисуй мне ягнёнка)"
"What! (Что?)"
"Draw me a sheep!" 
I jumped to my feet (я вскочил: досл. прыгнул на мои ноги), completely thunderstruck (совершенно ошарашенный: «thunderstruck» = «thunder»+ «struck» – «молния» + «удар»). I blinked my eyes hard (усиленно замигал: досл. я мигал моими глазами тяжело). I looked carefully all around me (тщательно огляделся: досл. смотрел кругом меня). And I saw a most extraordinary small person (и я увидел чрезвычайно необычного человечка: досл. маленькую персону), who stood there examining me (стоял изучая меня) with great seriousness (серьёзностью). Here you may see (вы можете видеть) the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him (который я позже смог нарисовать с него). But my drawing is certainly (конечно) very much less charming (намного меньше элегантный) than its model. 
 

1. So I lived my life alone, without anyone that I could really talk to, until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago. Something was broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers, I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone. It was a question of life or death for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week. 
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a thousand miles from any human habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement, at sunrise, when I was awakened by an odd little voice. It said:
"If you please - draw me a sheep!"
"What!"
"Draw me a sheep!" 
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I looked carefully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small person, who stood there examining me with great seriousness. Here you may see the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him. But my drawing is certainly very much less charming than its model. 
2. That, however, is not my fault (это, все же, не моя вина). The grown-ups discouraged (здесь: разуверили) me in my painter's career (карьере художника) when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything (и никогда не учился рисовать что-либо), except (кроме) boas from the outside and boas from the inside. 
Now I stared (пристально смотрел) at this sudden apparition (внезапное видение) with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment (с глазами на выкате от удивления: досл. с глазами прямо начинающими из моей головы). Remember (помните), I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region (я разбился в пустыне, за тысячи миль от какого-либо заселённого региона). And yet (и все же) my little man seemed (казался) neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands (ни блуждающим неуверенно среди песков), nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear (ни теряющим сознание от усталости или голода или жажды или страха). Nothing about him (ничто в нём: досл. о нём) gave any suggestion (давало какие-либо подозрения) of a child lost (ребёнок потерялся) in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last (когда наконец-то) I was able to speak (говорить), I said to him (ему): 
"But – what are you doing here? (но – что ты здесь делаешь)" 
And in answer he repeated (в ответ он повторил: «repeat – repeated» – повторять), very slowly (медленно), as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence (так как если бы он говорил о деле большой важности): 
"If you please – draw me a sheep..." 
When a mystery (загадка, тайна) is too overpowering (пересиливающая, подавляющая), one dare not disobey (никто не посмеет не подчиниться: досл. один (кто-то) не посмеет). Absurd as it might seem to me (глупо, как это могло мне казаться), a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death (в опасности смерти), I took out (вынул) of my pocket (карман) a sheet of paper (лист бумаги) and my fountain-pen (авторучку). But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated (как мои занятия были сосредоточены) on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (пареньку: досл. маленькому парню, «chap» – трещина, но разг. «парень») (a little crossly (сердитый), too) that I did not know how to draw (как рисовать). He answered me: "That doesn't matter (это неважно). Draw me a sheep..." 
But I had never (никогда) drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures (одну из двух) I had drawn so often (так часто). It was that (это была та) of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded (поражён) to hear the little fellow (парень) greet it with (приветствовал её с),
"No, no, no! I do not want (я не хочу) an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature (очень опасное создание), and an elephant is very cumbersome (громоздкий). Where I live (где я живу), everything (все: «everything» = «every» + «thing»= «все»+ «вещь») is very small. What I need is a sheep (что мне нужно, так это ягнёнок: досл. что мне нужно есть ягнёнок). Draw me a sheep." 
So then I made a drawing (и вот я нарисовал: досл. сделал рисунок). 
2. That, however, is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged me in my painter's career when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything, except boas from the outside and boas from the inside. 
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment. Remember, I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands, nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear. Nothing about him gave any suggestion of a child lost in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last I was able to speak, I said to him: 
"But - what are you doing here?" 
And in answer he repeated, very slowly, as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence: 
"If you please -- draw me a sheep..." 
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. Absurd as it might seem to me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death, I took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and my fountain-pen. But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (a little crossly, too) that I did not know how to draw. He answered me: "That doesn't matter. Draw me a sheep..." 
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures I had drawn so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded to hear the little fellow greet it with,
"No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature, and an elephant is very cumbersome. Where I live, everything is very small. What I need is a sheep. Draw me a sheep." 
So then I made a drawing. 
 
3. He looked at it carefully (посмотрел пристально), then he said:
"No. This sheep is already (уже) very sickly (болезненный). Make me another (другой)." 
So I made another drawing. 

3. He looked at it carefully, then he said:
"No. This sheep is already very sickly. Make me another." 
So I made another drawing.
 
4. My friend smiled gently and indulgently (мой друг улыбнулся мягко и неопределённо).
"You see yourself, (ты видишь сам)" he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram (баран). It has horns (у него рога)." 
So then I did my drawing over once more (ещё раз). 

4. My friend smiled gently and indulgently.
"You see yourself," he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram. It has horns." 
So then I did my drawing over once more. 

 
4. But it was rejected (отвергнут) too, just like the others (точно так же, как и другие). 
"This one is too old (этот слишком стар). I want a sheep that will live a long time (будет жить долгое время)." 
By this time (на этот раз: досл. тем временем) my patience was exhausted (моё терпение истощилось), because I was in a hurry (спешил: досл. был в спешке) to start taking my engine apart (демонтировать двигатель). So I tossed off («toss» – «подбрасывать») this drawing. And I threw out an explanation with it (и выбросил объяснение с ним). 
"This is only his box (только его коробка). The sheep you asked for is inside (ягнёнок, о котором ты просил, внутри: «to ask for» – «просить о чем-либо»)."

4. But it was rejected too, just like the others. 
"This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a long time." 
By this time my patience was exhausted, because I was in a hurry to start taking my engine apart. So I tossed off this drawing. And I threw out an explanation with it. 
"This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is inside." 
 
 
5. I was very surprised (удивлён) to see a light break over the face (как свет озарил лицо: досл. свет пробился на лицо) of my young judge (юного судьи): 
"That is exactly the way I wanted it (он именно такой, как я хотел: досл. это точно такой путь, как я его хотел)! Do you think (думаешь) that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass (этому ягнёнку нужно будет большое количество травы)?"
"Why (почему)?" 
"Because where I live everything is very small... (потому что, где я живу, всё очень маленькое)" 
"There (там) will surely (наверняка) be enough (достаточно) grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you (я нарисовал очень маленького ягнёнка: досл. это очень маленький ягнёнок, что я дал тебе)." 
He bent (наклонил) his head (голову) over the drawing:
"Not so small that – Look (не такой уж и маленький – посмотри)! He has gone to sleep... (он ушёл спать)"
And that is how (и вот так) I made the acquaintance (познакомился: досл. сделал знакомство) of the little prince. 
5. I was very surprised to see a light break over the face of my young judge: 
"That is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass?"
"Why?" 
"Because where I live everything is very small..." 
"There will surely be enough grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you." 
He bent his head over the drawing:
"Not so small that - Look! He has gone to sleep..."
And that is how I made the acquaintance of the little prince.

Chapter 3
1. It took me a long time (забрало у меня много времени) to learn where he came from (откуда он). The little prince, who asked me so many questions (который много спрашивал: досл. спрашивал много вопросов), never seemed to hear (никогда казалось слышал: в отличие о русского, в английском нет двойного возражения, сравни: он никогда не слышал) the ones I asked him (те, которые задавал я: «ones» – означает «questions», оно заменяет их в предложении, дабы не было тавтологии). It was from words dropped by chance that (это было со слов, брошенных случайно: «to drop – dropped» – падать, бросать, капля; «by chance» – «случайно»), little by little (понемножку), everything was revealed to me (всё было обнаружено мне: «reveal – revealed» – «обнаруживать»).
The first time (когда впервые: досл. первое время) he saw my airplane (самолёт), for instance (например) (I shall not draw (не буду рисовать) my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me (это было бы слишком сложно для меня)), he asked me:
"What is that object (объект, штуковина)?"
"That is not an object. It flies (он летает). It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly (и я гордился тем, что могу его научить, что я могу летать: «to be proud» – гордиться, быть гордым). He cried out (выкрикнул, воскликнул), then (тогда):
"What (как)! You dropped down from the sky (ты упал с небес: досл. упал вниз)?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly (ответил скромно: «modest» – скромный).
"Oh! That is funny! (как забавно: досл. это есть забавно)"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter (рассмеялся: досл. разбился в чудный (красивый) раскат смеха), which irritated (разозлил: «to irritate – irritated» – злить, раздражать) me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously (мне нравится, когда к моим несчастьям относятся серьёзно: досл. мои несчастья берутся серьёзно: «misfortune» – отсутствие счастья).
Then he added (добавил: «to add – added» – добавить, дополнить):
"So you, too, come from the sky (так ты тоже пришёл с неба)! Which is your planet? (с какой планеты: досл. которая есть твоя планета)"
At that moment (в тот момент) I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence (пролился свет на непостижимую тайну его присутствия: досл. я поймал проблеск света в непроницаемой тайне); and I demanded (потребовал: «to demand – demanded» – требовать), abruptly (резко):
"Do you come from another planet (другой планеты)?"
But he did not reply (но он не ответил). He tossed (наклонил) his head gently (мягко, осторожно), without taking his eyes from my plane (не отрывая глаз от моего самолёта: досл. без «забирания» его глаз):
"It is true (действительно: досл. это есть правда) that on that you can't have come from very far away... (что на этом ты не мог прийти из далека)"
And he sank into a reverie (задумался: досл. погрузился в мечтательность), which lasted a long time (которая продолжалась долгое время). Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket (вытянув моего ягнёнка из его (т. е. своего) кармана), he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure (он погрузился в созерцание своего сокровища: досл. спрятал, закопал себя в созерцание).
You can imagine (вы можете представить) how my curiosity was aroused (любопытство возросло) by this half-confidence about the "other planets"(этим полупризнанием о «других планетах»). I made a great effort (я попытался: досл. сделал большое усилие), therefore (следовательно), to find out more on this subject (узнать побольше по этому поводу: «to find out» – узнать, выяснить). "My little man, where do you come from (откуда ты: досл. откуда ты пришёл)? What is this 'where I live,' (что это за «где я живу») of which you speak (о котором ты говоришь)? Where do you want to take your sheep (куда ты хочешь забрать своего ягнёнка)?"
After a reflective silence (гулкой тишины: досл. отражающей тишины) he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me (что хорошо в коробке, которую ты мне дал: досл. вещь, которая так хороша, о коробке, которую ты дал мне) is that at night he can use it as his house (так это то, что ночью он сможет использовать её как свой дом)."
"That is so (это так). And if you are good (если ты добрый) I will give you a string (я дам тебе тесьму (верёвку)), too, so that you can tie him during the day (сможешь привязывать его на протяжение дня: «to tie – tied» – связывать), and a post (здесь: колышек, но имеет также  значения «сообщение», «посылать») to tie him to (к которому его привязать)."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer (казалось был шокирован этим предложением):
"Tie him (привязывать его)! What a queer idea (что за странная идея)!"
"But if you don't tie him (если ты его не привяжешь)," I said, "he will wander off somewhere (зайдёт куда-то: «to wander – wandered» – бродить), and get lost (потеряется: досл. получит потерю)."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter (ещё раз рассмеялся):
"But where do you think he would go? (но куда, по твоему мнению, он мог бы пойти)"
"Anywhere (куда угодно: «anywhere»= «any+where» = «любой»+ «где»). Straight ahead of him (прямо перед собой)."
Then the little prince said, earnestly (серьёзно):
"That doesn't matter (это неважно). Where I live, everything is so small (где я живу, всё очень маленькое)!
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness (немножко печально: досл. с возможно намёком на печаль), he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far... (идя прямо, никто не зайдёт далеко)"

1. It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince, who asked me so many questions, never seemed to hear the ones I asked him. It was from words dropped by chance that, little by little, everything was revealed to me.
The first time he saw my airplane, for instance (I shall not draw my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me), he asked me:
"What is that object?"
"That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly. He cried out, then:
"What! You dropped down from the sky?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly.
"Oh! That is funny!"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter, which irritated me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously.
Then he added:
"So you, too, come from the sky! Which is your planet?"
At that moment I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence; and I demanded, abruptly:
"Do you come from another planet?"
But he did not reply. He tossed his head gently, without taking his eyes from my plane:
"It is true that on that you can't have come from very far away..."
And he sank into a reverie, which lasted a long time. Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket, he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure.
You can imagine how my curiosity was aroused by this half-confidence about the "other planets." I made a great effort, therefore, to find out more on this subject. "My little man, where do you come from? What is this 'where I live,' of which you speak? Where do you want to take your sheep?"
After a reflective silence he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me is that at night he can use it as his house."
"That is so. And if you are good I will give you a string, too, so that you can tie him during the day, and a post to tie him to."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer:
"Tie him! What a queer idea!"
"But if you don't tie him," I said, "he will wander off somewhere, and get lost."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter:
"But where do you think he would go?"
"Anywhere. Straight ahead of him."
Then the little prince said, earnestly:
"That doesn't matter. Where I live, everything is so small!
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness, he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far..." 
 
 

Chapter 4
1. I had thus (таким образом) learned a second (второй) fact of great importance (факт большой важности): this was that (это было то) the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house (едва ли больше за дом)! 
But that did not really (вправду) surprise (удивило) me much. I knew very well (знал очень хорошо: «to know – knew» – знать) that in addition (в дополнение) to the great (больших) planets – such as (таких как) the Earth (Земля), Jupiter, Mars, Venus (Венера) – to which we have given names (которым были даны имена), there are (есть: досл. там есть) also hundreds of others (также сотни других), some of which (некоторые из которых) are so small that one has a hard time seeing them (что их тяжело увидеть: досл. один имеет тяжёлое время видя их) through (сквозь, через) the telescope. When an astronomer discovers (когда астрономы открывают: «to discover» – открывать в значении «делать открытие») one of these (одну из них) he does not give it a name, but only a number (но только номер). He might call it (он может назвать её), for example (для примера), "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason (у меня были серьёзные основания) to believe (верить) that the planet from which the little prince came (из которой пришёл маленький принц) is the asteroid known as (известный как) B-61. 
This asteroid has only once been seen (только раз был увиден) through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer (это был турецкий астроном), in 1909. 
1. I had thus learned a second fact of great importance: this was that the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house! 
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in addition to the great planets –such as the Earth, Jupiter, Mars, Venus – to which we have given names, there are also hundreds of others, some of which are so small that one has a hard time seeing them through the telescope. When an astronomer discovers one of these he does not give it a name, but only a number. He might call it, for example, "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason to believe that the planet from which the little prince came is the asteroid known as B-61. 
This asteroid has only once been seen through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer, in 1909.
 
2. On making his discovery (сделав открытие), the astronomer had presented it (представил его) to the International Astronomical Congress (Международному Астрономическому Конгрессу), in a great demonstration (с особой пышностью: досл. в большой демонстрации). But he was in Turkish costume (в турецком костюме), and so nobody would believe (никто не поверил) what he said (что он говорил). 
2. On making his discovery, the astronomer had presented it to the International Astronomical Congress, in a great demonstration. But he was in Turkish costume, and so nobody would believe what he said.
 
3. Grown-ups are like that (взрослые – они такие: досл. взрослые похожи на то)...
Fortunately (к счастью), however (тем не менее), for the reputation (для репутации) of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator made a law (сделал закон) that his subjects (подданные), under pain of death (под страхом смертной казни: досл. под болью смерти), should change to European costume (должны сменить одежду на европейский костюм).
3. Grown-ups are like that...
Fortunately, however, for the reputation of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator made a law that his subjects, under pain of death, should change to European costume.
 
4. So in 1920 the astronomer gave (дал: досл. «to give – gave – given» – давать) his demonstration all over again (опять), dressed with impressive style and elegance (одет впечатляюще стильно и элегантно: досл. одет с впечатляющим стилем и элегантностью). And this time everybody accepted his report (приняли его доклад: «to accept – accepted» – принимать). 
If I have told you these details (если я рассказал вам эти детали) about the asteroid, and made a note of its number for you (и указал номер: досл. сделал замечание его номера для вас), it is on account (на счёт) of the grown-ups and their ways (взглядов: досл. дорог, путей). When you tell them (когда ты говоришь им) that you have made a new friend (что у тебя новый друг: досл. ты сделал нового друга), they never ask you (никогда не спросят) any questions about essential matters (по сути: досл. о существенных делах). They never say (никогда не скажут) to you, "What does his voice sound like (какой у него голос: досл. на что похоже звучит)? What games does he love best (какие игры он любит большего всего: «the best» – наилучший)? Does he collect butterflies (коллекционирует бабочек)?" Instead (взамен), they demand (требуют): "How old is he (сколько лет ему)? How many brothers has he (сколько братьев он имеет)? How much does he weigh (весит)? How much money does his father make (сколько денег зарабатывает его отец: досл. как много денег делает)?" Only from these figures (только по этим чертам, цифрам) do they think they have learned anything (что-либо) about him. 
If you were to say to the grown-ups (если бы вы сказали взрослым): "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick (из розового кирпича), with geraniums in the windows (геранью на окне) and doves on the roof (голубами на крыше)," they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all (они не в состоянии будут представить его вообще: досл. они не будут способны поймать идею этого дома в целом). You would have to say to them (вам нужно сказать им): "I saw a house that cost (стоит) $ 20,000." Then they would exclaim (они воскликнули бы):
"Oh, what a pretty (милый) house that is!" 
Just so (точно так же), you might (могли) say to them: 
"The proof (доказательство) that the little prince existed (существует: «to exist – existed» – существовать) is that he was charming (очарователен), that he laughed (смеялся), and that he was looking for a sheep (разыскивал ягнёнка: вообще-то «ягнёнок» – «lamb», а «sheep» – овца). If anybody wants a sheep (если кто-то хочет ягнёнка), that is a proof that he exists (это доказательство того, что он существует)."
And what good would it do to tell them that (и что толку было бы им это говорить: досл. что хорошего это сделало бы сказать им это)? They would shrug their shoulders (пожали бы плечами), and treat you like a child (воспримут тебя как ребёнка). But if you said to them: 
"The planet he came from (пришёл с) is Asteroid B-612," then they would be convinced (были бы убеждены), and leave you in peace from their questions (и перестали бы задавать вопросы: досл. оставили бы вас в спокойствии от их вопросов). 
They are like that (они такие). One must not hold it against them (не надо против них выступать: досл. один не должен держать это против них). Children should always show great forbearance toward (детям должно всегда проявлять огромную терпимость к) grown-up people (взрослые люди). 
But certainly (но конечно же), for us who understand life (для нас, понимающих жизнь: досл. для нас, кто понимает жизнь), figures are a matter of indifference (цифры не имеют значения: досл. цифры есть дело безразличия). I should have liked to begin (я хотел бы начать) this story (историю) in the fashion of the fairy-tales (в стиле сказки). I should have like to say (хотел бы сказать): "Once upon a time (как-то давным-давно) there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself (едва ли больше него самого), and who had need of a sheep... (которому нужен был ягнёнок)" 
To those (для тех) who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth (звучало бы правдоподобнее: досл. это дало бы больше воздуха правды) to my story. 
For I do not want any one (кто-то, любой) to read my book carelessly (беззаботно). I have suffered too much grief (мне было тяжело: досл. я страдал слишком много скорби) in setting down these memories (упорядочить воспоминания). Six years have already passed (6 лет уже прошло) since my friend went away from me (с тех пор, как мой друг покинул меня: досл. ушёл о меня), with his sheep. If I try to describe him here (если я пытаюсь его описать здесь), it is to make sure that I shall not forget him (чтобы быть уверенным, что я его не забуду). To forget a friend is sad (забывать друга – печально: «to forget – forgot» – забывать). Not every one has had a friend (не у каждого был друг). And if I forget him, I may become (могу стать) like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything (которые больше не заинтересованы ничем: «to be interested in anything» – быть заинтересованным в чём-либо) but figures... 
It is for that purpose (для этой цели), again (опять же), that I have bought (купил: «to buy – bought» – купить) a box of paints (коробку красок) and some pencils (карандаши). It is hard (тяжело) to take up (приниматься) drawing again at my age (в моём возрасте), when I have never made (никогда не делал) any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try (я конечно попытаюсь) to make my portraits as true to life as possible (по возможности нарисовать похожие портреты: досл. сделать портреты такими правдивыми к жизни как возможно). But I am not at all sure of success (но я в общем не уверен в успехе). One drawing goes along all right (получается совсем правильным), and another has no resemblance to its subject (другой не имеет схожести к его предмету). I make some errors (делаю некоторые ошибки), too, in the little prince's height (рост маленького принца): in one place (в одном месте) he is too tall (слишком высок) and in another too short (короток). And I feel some doubts (чувствую некоторые сомнения) about the color of his costume. So I fumble (нащупывать) along as best I can (хорошо, как только мог), now (сейчас) good, now bad, and I hope (надеюсь) generally fair-to-middling (в общем так себе). 
In certain more important details (в некоторых более важных деталях) I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something that will not be my fault (вина). My friend never explained anything to me (никогда ничего не объяснял). He thought (думал), perhaps (возможно), that I was like himself (что я такой, как он). But I, alas (увы), do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes (не знаю, как увидеть ягнёнка сквозь стены коробки). Perhaps I am a little like (немного похож) the grown-ups. I have had to grow old (я повзрослел). 
4. So in 1920 the astronomer gave his demonstration all over again, dressed with impressive style and elegance. And this time everybody accepted his report. 
If I have told you these details about the asteroid, and made a note of its number for you, it is on account of the grown-ups and their ways. When you tell them that you have made a new friend, they never ask you any questions about essential matters. They never say to you, "What does his voice sound like? What games does he love best? Does he collect butterflies?" Instead, they demand: "How old is he? How many brothers has he? How much does he weigh? How much money does his father make?" Only from these figures do they think they have learned anything about him. 
If you were to say to the grown-ups: "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick, with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof," they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all. You would have to say to them: "I saw a house that cost $ 20,000." Then they would exclaim:
"Oh, what a pretty house that is!" 
Just so, you might say to them: 
"The proof that the little prince existed is that he was charming, that he laughed, and that he was looking for a sheep. If anybody wants a sheep, that is a proof that he exists."
And what good would it do to tell them that? They would shrug their shoulders, and treat you like a child. But if you said to them: 
"The planet he came from is Asteroid B-612," then they would be convinced, and leave you in peace from their questions. 
They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should always show great forbearance toward grown-up people. 
But certainly, for us who understand life, figures are a matter of indifference. I should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of the fairy-tales. I should have like to say: "Once upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself, and who had need of a sheep..." 
To those who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth to my story. 
For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered too much grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already passed since my friend went away from me, with his sheep. If I try to describe him here, it is to make sure that I shall not forget him. To forget a friend is sad. Not every one has had a friend. And if I forget him, I may become like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything but figures... 
It is for that purpose, again, that I have bought a box of paints and some pencils. It is hard to take up drawing again at my age, when I have never made any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try to make my portraits as true to life as possible. But I am not at all sure of success. One drawing goes along all right, and another has no resemblance to its subject. I make some errors, too, in the little prince's height: in one place he is too tall and in another too short. And I feel some doubts about the color of his costume. So I fumble along as best I can, now good, now bad, and I hope generally fair-to-middling. 
In certain more important details I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something that will not be my fault. My friend never explained anything to me. He thought, perhaps, that I was like himself. But I, alas, do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes. Perhaps I am a little like the grown-ups. I have had to grow old.

	
Chapter 5
1. As each day passed (как проходил каждый день) I would learn (изучал), in our talk (как я говорил: досл. в нашем разговоре), something (что-то) about the little prince's planet, his departure (отъезд) from it, his journey (путешествие). The information would come very slowly (поступала очень медленно), as it might chance (могло случиться) to fall from his thoughts (выпасть из его мыслей). It was in this way (это было в этом пути) that I heard (услышал: «to hear – heard» – слышать), on the third (третий) day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs (катастрофа с баобабом). 
This time, once more (ещё раз: досл. раз больше), I had the sheep to thank for it (я должен благодарить ягнёнка за это: досл. я имел ягнёнка поблагодарить за это). For the little prince asked (спросил) me abruptly (резко) - as if seized by a grave doubt (так будто выхвачено серьёзными сомнениями) – "It is true, isn't it (не правда ли: досл. не есть это), that sheep eat little bushes (ягнёнок ест маленькие кустарников)?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad (я доволен)!"
I did not understand (я не понимал) why it was so important (почему это так важно) that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added (добавил):
"Then it follows (это следует) that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out (отметил) to the little prince that baobabs were not (не есть) little bushes, but, on the contrary (напротив), trees as big as castles (деревья такие же большие, как замок); and that even if (даже если) he took a whole herd (стадо) of elephants away with him (туда с собой), the herd would not eat up one single baobab (ни одного баобаба: досл. один единственный баобаб). 
The idea of the herd of elephants (идея о стаде слонов) made the little prince laugh (заставила принца смеяться: досл. сделала маленького принца смеющимся).
"We would have to put them one on top of the other (нам придётся поставить из друг на друга: досл. одного на верхушку другого)," he said.
1. As each day passed I would learn, in our talk, something about the little prince's planet, his departure from it, his journey. The information would come very slowly, as it might chance to fall from his thoughts. It was in this way that I heard, on the third day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs. 
This time, once more, I had the sheep to thank for it. For the little prince asked me abruptly - as if seized by a grave doubt-- "It is true, isn't it, that sheep eat little bushes?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad!"
I did not understand why it was so important that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added:
"Then it follows that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out to the little prince that baobabs were not little bushes, but, on the contrary, trees as big as castles; and that even if he took a whole herd of elephants away with him, the herd would not eat up one single baobab. 
The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh.
"We would have to put them one on top of the other," he said.  
 
2. But he made a wise comment (мудрое пояснение):
"Before they grow so big (перед тем, как они выросли такими большими), the baobabs start out by being little (они были маленькими: досл. баобабы начали с быть маленькими)."
"That is strictly correct (очень правильно: досл. строго правильно)," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs (почему ты хочешь, чтобы ягнёнок ел маленькие баобабы)?"
He answered me at once (сразу же), "Oh, come, come! (ладно, ладно)", as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident (так как если бы он говорил о чём-то, что было очевидно). And I was obliged (был обязан) to make a great mental effort (сделать огромное умственное усилие) to solve (развязать) this problem, without any assistance (без какого-либо участия).
Indeed (на самом деле), as I learned (как я узнал), there were on the planet (было на планете) where the little prince lived – as on all (как и на всех) planets – good plants (растения) and bad plants. In consequence (в следствие), there were good seeds (семена) from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible (невидимые). They sleep deep (спят глубоко) in the heart of the earth's darkness (в сердце земной темноты), until some one among them (кто-то среди них) is seized with the desire to awaken (поднимается с желанием проснуться). Then this little seed will stretch itself (делают усилия) and begin (начинают) – timidly at first (робко с начала) – to push a charming little sprig (давать очаровательный маленький росток: досл. толкать росток) inoffensively upward toward the sun (безобидно вверх к солнцу). If it is only a sprout of radish (росток редиса) or the sprig of a rose-bush (побег куста роз), one would let it grow wherever it might wish (можно позволить им расти где угодно). But when it is a bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible (нужно уничтожить его настолько быстро, насколько возможно), the very first instant that one recognizes it (в первое мгновение, как узнали его). 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet (сейчас были на планете ужасные семена на планете) that was the home (была домом) of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil (почва) of that planet was infested (наводнены) with them. A baobab is something you will never (баобаб – это такое, от чего вы никогда), never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late (никогда не сможете отделаться, если заметите слишком поздно: «to get rid of» – отделаться от кого-то или чего-то). It spreads (распространяется) over the entire (всей) planet. It bores clear through it with its roots (он пронизывает её всю своими корнями). And if the planet is too small (слишком мала), and the baobabs are too many (слишком много), they split it in pieces (разделят её на части)... 
2. But he made a wise comment:
"Before they grow so big, the baobabs start out by being little."
"That is strictly correct," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs?"
He answered me at once, "Oh, come, come!", as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident. And I was obliged to make a great mental effort to solve this problem, without any assistance.
Indeed, as I learned, there were on the planet where the little prince lived-- as on all planets-- good plants and bad plants. In consequence, there were good seeds from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible. They sleep deep in the heart of the earth's darkness, until some one among them is seized with the desire to awaken. Then this little seed will stretch itself and begin-- timidly at first-- to push a charming little sprig inoffensively upward toward the sun. If it is only a sprout of radish or the sprig of a rose-bush, one would let it grow wherever it might wish. But when it is a bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible, the very first instant that one recognizes it. 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet that was the home of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil of that planet was infested with them. A baobab is something you will never, never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late. It spreads over the entire planet. It bores clear through it with its roots. And if the planet is too small, and the baobabs are too many, they split it in pieces...
 
3. "It is a question of discipline (это вопрос дисциплины)," the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning (когда ты закончил утренние процедуры), then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet (тогда время привести в порядок твою планету), just so (точно так же), with the greatest care (с наибольшей заботой). You must see to it (ты должен следить) that you pull up regularly (вытянуть постоянно) all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be distinguished (с первого момента, когда их можно отличить) from the rosebushes which they resemble (которые они напоминают) so closely in their earliest youth (так близко в их наиболее ранней юности). It is very tedious (скучный) work," the little prince added, "but very easy (лёгкий)." 
3. "It is a question of discipline," the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning, then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet, just so, with the greatest care. You must see to it that you pull up regularly all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be distinguished from the rosebushes which they resemble so closely in their earliest youth. It is very tedious work," the little prince added, "but very easy."
 
4. And one day (однажды: досл. один день) he said to me: "You ought to make (должен сделать) a beautiful drawing, so that (чтобы) the children where you live (там, где ты живёшь) can see exactly how all this is (точно видели, как всё это есть). That would be very useful to them (это было бы очень полезно для них) if they were to travel some day (если им придётся путешествовать когда-то). Sometimes (иногда)," he added, "there is no harm (это не вред) in putting off a piece of work until another day (отложить часть работы на другой день). But when it is a matter of baobabs (но если дело касается баобабов), that always means a catastrophe (это всегда означает катастрофу). I knew a planet that was inhabited (была заселена) by a lazy man (ленивым человеком). He neglected (проигнорировал) three little bushes..." 
So, as the little prince described it to me (как маленький принц описал мне это), I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like (мне не очень нравится) to take the tone of a moralist (держать тон поучения). But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood (опасность баобабов так мало понимаема), and such considerable risks would be run by anyone (это угрожает любому: досл. и такой значительный риск может бежать кем угодно) who might get lost (потеряться) on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through my reserve (нарушу своё правило: досл. прорвусь сквозь). "Children (дети)," I say plainly (просто), "watch out for the baobabs (присматривайте за баобабами)!" 
My friends, like myself (мои друзья, как и я сам), have been skirting this danger for a long time (были окружены этой опасностью долгое время: «skirted» – окруженный и «skirt» – юбка), without ever knowing it (даже без знания этого); and so it is for them (это для них) that I have worked so hard over (я работал так тяжело над) this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means (урок, который был преподан мне в этом смысле: «pass» – передавать, проходить) is worth all the trouble it has cost me (стоит всех тех хлопот, которые он мне стоил: «to be worth» – стоить чего-либо). 
Perhaps (возможно) you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book (почему нет других рисунков в этой книге) as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs? (таких же чудесных и впечатляющих, как рисунок баобаба)" 
The reply is simple (ответ прост). I have tried (я пытался). But with the others I have not been successful (но с другими я не преуспел). When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity (я вдохновлялся срочной необходимостью: досл. я был несом передо мной  вдохновляющей силой срочной необходимости). 
4. And one day he said to me: "You ought to make a beautiful drawing, so that the children where you live can see exactly how all this is. That would be very useful to them if they were to travel some day. Sometimes," he added, "there is no harm in putting off a piece of work until another day. But when it is a matter of baobabs, that always means a catastrophe. I knew a planet that was inhabited by a lazy man. He neglected three little bushes..." 
So, as the little prince described it to me, I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like to take the tone of a moralist. But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood, and such considerable risks would be run by anyone who might get lost on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through my reserve. "Children," I say plainly, "watch out for the baobabs!" 
My friends, like myself, have been skirting this danger for a long time, without ever knowing it; and so it is for them that I have worked so hard over this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means is worth all the trouble it has cost me. 
Perhaps you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs?" 
The reply is simple. I have tried. But with the others I have not been successful. When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity.

Chapter 6
1. Oh, little prince! Bit by bit (понемногу) I came to understand (я пришёл к пониманию) the secrets of your sad little life (секретов твоей грустной маленькой жизни)... For a long time (длительное время) you had found your only entertainment (ты находил своё единственное развлечение) in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset (в тихом удовольствии созерцания заката: «sunset» – «sun+set» – солнце + садиться). I learned that new (новую) detail on the morning of the fourth (четвёртый) day, when you said to me: "I am very fond of (люблю: «to be fond of» – любить, увлекаться чем-то) sunsets. Come, let us go look (пойдём посмотрим) at a sunset now."
1. Oh, little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the secrets of your sad little life... For a long time you had found your only entertainment in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset. I learned that new detail on the morning of the fourth day, w hen you said to me: "I am very fond of sunsets. Come, let us go look at a sunset now." 
 
2. "But we must wait (должны подождать)," I said.
"Wait? For what? (Ждать? Чего?)"
"For the sunset (заката). We must wait until it is time (пока не придёт время)." 
At first (поначалу) you seemed to be very much surprised (ты казался очень удивлённым). And then you laughed to yourself (рассмеялся: досл. рассмеялся к себе). You said to me (ты сказал мне):
"I am always thinking that I am at home (я постоянно думаю, что я дома)!" 
Just so (именно так). Everybody knows (каждый знает) that when it is noon (полдень) in the United States the sun is setting (садится) over France (над Францией). 
If you could fly to France in one minute (если бы ты мог долететь до Франции за 1 минуту: досл. в 1 минуту), you could go straight into the sunset (ты вошёл бы прямо в закат), right from noon (сразу же после полдня). Unfortunately (к несчастью), France is too far away for that (слишком далеко для этого). But on your tiny (крошечной) planet, my little prince (мой маленький принц), all you need do is move your chair a few steps (тебе достаточно переставить стул: досл. всё, что ты должен сделать, есть передвинуть твой стул на несколько шагов). You can see the day end (конец дня) and the twilight falling (как опускаются сумерки: досл. сумерки падают) whenever you like (когда бы ты ни захотел)... 
"One day (один день)," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times (видел закат 44 раза)!"
And a little later (чуть погодя) you added:
"You know – one loves the sunset, when one is so sad (опечаленные любят закат: досл. один любит закат, когда один печальный)..."
"Were you so sad, then (значит, тебе было грустно: досл. был ты так печален, тогда)?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets (на день 44 заката)? 
But the little prince made no reply (не ответил: досл. сделал ни одного ответа). 
2. "But we must wait," I said.
"Wait? For what?"
"For the sunset. We must wait until it is time." 
At first you seemed to be very much surprised. And then you laughed to yourself. You said to me:
"I am always thinking that I am at home!" 
Just so. Everybody knows that when it is noon in the United States the sun is setting over France. 
If you could fly to France in one minute, you could go straight into the sunset, right from noon. Unfortunately, France is too far away for that. But on your tiny planet, my little prince, all you need do is move your chair a few steps. You can see the day end and the twilight falling whenever you like... 
"One day," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times!"
And a little later you added:
"You know - one loves the sunset, when one is so sad..."
"Were you so sad, then?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets? 
But the little prince made no reply.
	

Chapter 7
1. On the fifth (пятый) day – again (опять), as always (как всегда), it was thanks to the sheep (это было благодаря ягнёнку) – the secret of the little prince's life (секрет жизни маленького принца) was revealed (был открыт) to me. Abruptly (резко), without anything to lead up to it (совершенно внезапно: досл. без чего-то подготавливающему к этому: «to lead up to» – подготовить), and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem (как если бы вопрос родился из долгих и молчаливых раздумий (медитаций) над его проблемой), he demanded (потребовал):
"A sheep – if it eats little bushes (ест маленький кусты), does it eat flowers, too (ест он также цветы)?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach (ест всё, что находит в пределах своей досягаемости)."
"Even (даже) flowers that have thorns (шипы)?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns –  what use are they (какой в них прок: досл. какая польза есть они)?" 
I did not know (я не знал). At that moment (в тот момент) I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt (был занят, пытаясь отвинтить болт) that had got stuck in my engine (который застрял в двигателе). I was very much worried (был очень обеспокоен), for it was becoming clear to me (так как до меня доходило) that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious (поломка моего самолёта была чрезвычайно серьёзной). And I had so little drinking-water left (и у меня так мало осталось питьевой воды) that I had to fear for the worst (я начал бояться наихудшего). "The thorns – what use are they?" 
The little prince never let go of a question (всегда настаивал: досл. никогда не отпускал вопроса), once he had asked it (однажды задав его). As for me (что касается меня), I was upset over that bolt (был расстроен из-за болта). And I answered with the first thing (первая мысль) that came into my head (пришла в мою голову):
"The thorns are of no use at all (от шипов вообще никакой пользы). Flowers have thorns just for spite (у цветов шипы от злости)!"
"Oh!" 
There was a moment of complete silence (момент полнейшей тишины). Then the little prince flashed back at me (выпалил мне: «flash» – вспышка), with a kind of resentfulness (с обидой: досл. с видом обиженности): "I don't believe (верить) you! Flowers are weak creatures (слабые существа). They are naіve (наивные). They reassure themselves as best they can (успокаивают себя как только могут: досл. успокаивают себя наилучше они могут). They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons (ужасное оружие)..."
1. On the fifth day - again, as always, it was thanks to the sheep - the secret of the little prince's life was revealed to me. Abruptly, without anything to lead up to it, and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem, he demanded:
"A sheep - if it eats little bushes, does it eat flowers, too?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach."
"Even flowers that have thorns?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns - what use are they?" 
I did not know. At that moment I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt that had got stuck in my engine. I was very much worried, for it was becoming clear to me that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious. And I had so little drinking-water left that I had to fear for the worst. "The thorns-- what use are they?" 
The little prince never let go of a question, once he had asked it. As for me, I was upset over that bolt. And I answered with the first thing that came into my head:
"The thorns are of no use at all. Flowers have thorns just for spite!"
"Oh!" 
There was a moment of complete silence. Then the little prince flashed back at me, with a kind of resentfulness: "I don't believe you! Flowers are weak creatures. They are naive. They reassure themselves as best they can. They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons..." 
 
2. I did not answer (я не ответил). At that instant (в то мгновение) I was saying to myself (я сказал себе): "If this bolt still won't turn (если этот болт не провернётся), I am going to knock it out with the hammer (я выбью его молотом)." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts (побеспокоил мои мысли). "And you actually (действительно) believe that the flowers – "
"Oh, no!" I cried (закричал). "No, no no! I don't believe anything (я ни во что не верю). I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see (неужели ты не видишь) – I am very busy with matters of consequence (досл. делом особой важности)!" 
He stared at me, thunderstruck (уставился на меня, словно поражённый громом).
"Matters of consequence!" 
He looked at me there (он смотрел на меня), with my hammer in my hand (с молотом в руке), my fingers black with engine-grease (пальцы чёрные от моторного масла), bending down over an object (согнувшегося на штуковиной) which seemed to him extremely ugly (которая казалась ему невероятно уродливой)...
"You talk just like the grown-ups (ты говоришь, как взрослый)!"
That made me a little ashamed (мне стало немного стыдно: досл. это сделало меня немного застыдившимся). But he went on (продолжал), relentlessly (неумолимо):
"You mix everything up together (ты всё смешал вместе)... You confuse everything (спутал всё)..." 
He was really very angry (злой). He tossed his golden curls in the breeze (он встряхнул своими золотыми кудрями на ветру).
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced (некоторый краснолицый) gentleman. He has never smelled a flower (не знает запаха цветов: никогда не нюхал: «to smell – smelled» –  пахнуть, чувствовать запах). He has never looked at a star (не глядел на звёзды). He has never loved any one (никогда никого не любил). He has never done anything in his life (он ничего не делал в своей жизни) but add up figures (только складывал цифры). And all day he says over and over, just like you (и весь день он повторял снова и снова, точно как ты): 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride (это заставляло его раздуваться о гордости: «swell up» – распухать). But he is not a man (он не человек) – he is a mushroom (гриб)!"
"A what (Что)?"
"A mushroom!" 
The little prince was now white with rage (побелел от ярости: досл. был сейчас белый с яростью).
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years (растили шипы миллионы лет). For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same (миллионы лет овцы если их, точно также). And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them (почему цветы утруждают себя, взращивая шипы, от которых нет пользы: досл. почему цветы идут в так много забот)? Is the warfare (война) between (между) the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence (не более ли это важно) than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums (чем суммы краснолицего джентельмена)? And if I know – I, myself (я, лично) – one flower which is unique in the world (единственный в мире), which grows nowhere but on my planet (нигде не растет, кроме моей планеты: досл. растет нигде, только на моей планете), but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning (но которое один ягнёнок может уничтожить в одно мгновение какого-то утра), without even noticing what he is doing (даже не замечая, что делает) – Oh! You think that is not important!" 
His face turned from white to red (превратилось с белого в красное) as he continued (по мере того, как он продолжал: «to continue – continued» – продолжать):
"If some one loves a flower (если кто-то любит цветок), of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars (цветение которого одно на миллионы звезд: досл. которого только одно цветение растёт во всех миллионах и миллионах звезд), it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars (этого достаточно, чтобы сделать его счастливым, когда он смотрит на звезды). He can say to himself (он может сказать себе), 'Somewhere, my flower is there... (где-то там мой цветок…)' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened (все его звёзды померкнут)... And you think that is not important!" 
He could not say anything more (ему нечего было добавить). His words were choked (были задушены) by sobbing (рыданием). 
The night had fallen (наступила ночь: досл. ночь упала). I had let my tools drop from my hands (я оставил инструменты: досл. дал инструментам выпасть из моих рук). Of what moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death (и какое значение имели мой молот, болт, жажда или смерть: «moment» в устойчивых выражениях может означать «важность»)? On one star, one planet, my planet (моей планете), the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted (был маленький принц, который нуждался в утешении). I took him in my arms (взял на руки), and rocked (качать) him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger (цветок, который ты любишь, в безопасности: досл. не есть в опасности). I will draw you a muzzle (намордник) for your sheep. I will draw you a railing (ограду) to put around your flower (поставить вокруг цветка). I will – " 
I did not know what to say to him (я не знал, что ему сказать). I felt awkward and blundering (я чувствовал себя неудобно и глупо: досл. ошибочно). I did not know how I could reach him (я не знал, как его достичь), where (где) I could overtake (обогнать) him and go on hand in hand with him once more (идти рука об руку с ним ещё раз). 
It is such a secret place, the land of tears (это такое тайное место, земля слёз). 
2. I did not answer. At that instant I was saying to myself: "If this bolt still won't turn, I am going to knock it out with the hammer." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts. "And you actually believe that the flowers - "
"Oh, no!" I cried. "No, no no! I don't believe anything. I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see - I am very busy with matters of consequence!" 
He stared at me, thunderstruck.
"Matters of consequence!" 
He looked at me there, with my hammer in my hand, my fingers black with engine-grease, bending down over an object which seemed to him extremely ugly...
"You talk just like the grown-ups!"
That made me a little ashamed. But he went on, relentlessly:
"You mix everything up together... You confuse everything..." 
He was really very angry. He tossed his golden curls in the breeze.
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced gentleman. He has never smelled a flower. He has never looked at a star. He has never loved any one. He has never done anything in his life but add up figures. And all day he says over and over, just like you: 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride. But he is not a man-- he is a mushroom!"
"A what?"
"A mushroom!" 
The little prince was now white with rage.
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years. For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same. And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them? Is the warfare between the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums? And if I know - I, myself - one flower which is unique in the world, which grows nowhere but on my planet, but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning, without even noticing what he is doing-- Oh! You think that is not important!" 
His face turned from white to red as he continued:
"If some one loves a flower, of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars, it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars. He can say to himself, 'Somewhere, my flower is there...' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened... And you think that is not important!" 
He could not say anything more. His words were choked by sobbing. 
The night had fallen. I had let my tools drop from my hands. Of what moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death? On one star, one planet, my planet, the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted. I took him in my arms, and rocked him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger. I will draw you a muzzle for your sheep. I will draw you a railing to put around your flower. I will - " 
I did not know what to say to him. I felt awkward and blundering. I did not know how I could reach him, where I could overtake him and go on hand in hand with him once more. 
It is such a secret place, the land of tears. 

Chapter 8
1. I soon learned to know this flower better (вскоре я узнал этот цветок лучше: досл. я научился знать). On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple (всегда были очень просты). They had only one ring of petals (кольцо лепестков); they took up no room at all (не занимали места: «room» не только «комната», но и «место»); they were a trouble to nobody (никому не создавали проблем: досл. были проблемой для никого). One morning they would appear in the grass (утром они появлялись в траве), and by night they would have faded peacefully away (к ночи мирно исчезали: досл. ночью увядали мирно прочь: «to fade – faded» – увядать, линять). But one day, from a seed (семена) blown from no one knew where (принесённому ветром неизвестно откуда: «to blow – blown» – дуть), a new flower had come up (появился); and the little prince had watched very closely (наблюдал очень внимательно: досл. очень близко) over this small sprout (росток) which was not like any other small sprouts (который не походил на другие маленькие ростки) on his planet. It might (это мог), you see (понимаете), have been a new kind (новый вид) of baobab. 
The shrub (куст) soon stopped growing (перестал расти вскоре: досл. вскоре остановил рост), and began to get ready to produce a flower (и собрался цвести: досл. начал ставать готов производить цветок). The little prince, who was present (присутствовал) at the first appearance (появление) of a huge bud (огромного бутона), felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition (предчувствовал сразу же чудесное видение) must emerge from it (которое должно было появиться с этого). But the flower was not satisfied (но цветку было мало: досл. цветок не был удовлетворен) to complete the preparations for her beauty (завершить приготовления к своей красоте: «to prepare» – приготовить, «preparation» – приготовления) in the shelter of her green chamber (в укрытии его зелёных покоев: в англ. «flower» – she (она), поэтому «her», а рус. цветок – муж. рода). She chose her colors with the greatest care (он (она) подбирал цвета особо тщательно: досл. с величайшей заботой). She adjusted (приводил(а) в порядок) her petals (лепестки) one by one (один за другим). She did not wish to go out into the world (он(а) не хотел(а) появляться в этот мир) all rumpled (мятый), like the field poppies (полевые маки). It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear (он(а) хотел(а) появиться в полном сиянии своей красоты: досл. это было только полное сияние ее красоты, что она хотела появиться). Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature (кокетливое создание)! And her mysterious adornment (её таинственное украшение) lasted for days and days (длилось многие дни). 
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise (точно на рассвете), she suddenly showed herself (она внезапно показала себя). And, after working with all this painstaking precision (после такой старательной, четкой работы: досл. после работы со всей этой старательной четкостью), she yawned (зевнула) and said:
"Ah! I am scarcely awake (я не вполне проснулась). I beg that you will excuse me (прошу прощения: досл. я прошу, чтобы вы извинили меня). My petals are still all disarranged (мои лепестки в таком беспорядке)..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration (не смог удержать свой восторг):
"Oh! How beautiful you are (какая ты красивая)!"
"Am I not (не правда ли: досл. не есть я)?" the flower responded, sweetly (ответила сладко). "And I was born at the same moment as the sun... (я родилась одновременно с солнцем)"
The little prince could guess easily enough (мог сразу догадаться: «to guess – guessed» – догадываться) that she was not any too modest (она была не слишком скромна) – but how moving (трогательной) – and exciting (волнующей) – she was! "I think it is time for breakfast (думаю, пора завтракать: досл. это есть время для завтрака)," she added an instant later (мгновение спустя). "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs (если вы будете так добры и позаботитесь о мне: досл. если вы имели бы доброту подумать о моих потребностях) – " 
And the little prince, completely abashed (совсем смущённый), went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water (пошёл искать лейку со свежей водой: «sprinkling» – брызгающий, «can» – бидон). 
1. I soon learned to know this flower better. On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple. They had only one ring of petals; they took up no room at all; they were a trouble to nobody. One morning they would appear in the grass, and by night they would have faded peacefully away. But one day, from a seed blown from no one knew where, a new flower had come up; and the little prince had watched very closely over this small sprout which was not like any other small sprouts on his planet. It might, you see, have been a new kind of baobab. 
The shrub soon stopped growing, and began to get ready to produce a flower. The little prince, who was present at the first appearance of a huge bud, felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition must emerge from it. But the flower was not satisfied to complete the preparations for her beauty in the shelter of her green chamber. She chose her colors with the greatest care. She adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to go out into the world all rumpled, like the field poppies. It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear. Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature! And her mysterious adornment lasted for days and days. 
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise, she suddenly showed herself. And, after working with all this painstaking precision, she yawned and said:
"Ah! I am scarcely awake. I beg that you will excuse me. My petals are still all disarranged..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration:
"Oh! How beautiful you are!"
"Am I not?" the flower responded, sweetly. "And I was born at the same moment as the sun..."
The little prince could guess easily enough that she was not any too modest – but how moving – and exciting – she was! "I think it is time for breakfast," she added an instant later. "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs – " 
And the little prince, completely abashed, went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water. 



2. So, he tended (заботился: «to tend – tended» – заботиться) the flower. 
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity (так же и она начала очень скоро мучить его своим тщеславием) – which was (которое было), if the truth be known (если говорить по правде: досл. если правда известна), a little difficult to deal with (немного трудно было иметь дело: «to deal with» – иметь дело). One day, for instance (например), when she was speaking of her four thorns (четыре шипа), she said to the little prince: "Let the tigers come with their claws (пусть только появятся тигры с их когтями)!" 
2. So, he tended the flower. 
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity - which was, if the truth be known, a little difficult to deal with. One day, for instance, when she was speaking of her four thorns, she said to the little prince: "Let the tigers come with their claws!"
 
3. "There are no tigers on my planet (на моей планете нет тигров)," the little prince objected (возразил). "And, anyway (в любом случае), tigers do not eat weeds (бурьян)." "I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly. "Please excuse me... (извини меня)". "I am not at all afraid of tigers (я вообще не боюсь тигров)," she went on (продолжала), "but I have a horror of drafts (сквозняки). I suppose (предполагаю) you wouldn't have a screen (у тебя не найдётся ширмы) for me?" "A horror of drafts (боязнь сквозняков) – that is bad luck (несчастье), for a plant (растение)," remarked (заметил) the little prince, and added to himself (и про себя добавил), "This flower is a very complex (запутанный, составной, сложный) creature..." "At night I want you to put me under a glass globe (накрыл меня стеклянным шаром: досл. я хочу, чтобы ты поставил меня под…). It is very cold (очень холодно) where you live. In the place I came from (там, откуда я пришла) – "
3. "There are no tigers on my planet," the little prince objected. "And, anyway, tigers do not eat weeds." "I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly. "Please excuse me..." "I am not at all afraid of tigers," she went on, "but I have a horror of drafts. I suppose you wouldn't have a screen for me?" "A horror of drafts - that is bad luck, for a plant," remarked the little prince, and added to himself, "This flower is a very complex creature..." "At night I want you to put me under a glass globe. It is very cold where you live. In the place I came from - " 
 
4. But she interrupted herself at that point (замолчала: досл. прервала себя по этому поводу). She had come in the form of a seed (пришла в форме семена). She could not have known anything of any other worlds (не могла что-либо знать о других мирах). Embarrassed  over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a naive untruth (смущенная, что попалась на такой простой неправде: досл. дала себе быть пойманной на краю…), she coughed (кашлянула) two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong (чтобы маленький принц почувствовал себя виноватым: досл. в порядке чтобы поставить маленького принца в «неправильность»). "The screen?" "I was just going to look for it (я как раз собирался идти искать её) when you spoke to me..."
4. But she interrupted herself at that point. She had come in the form of a seed. She could not have known anything of any other worlds. Embarrassed over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a naive untruth, she coughed two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong. "The screen?" "I was just going to look for it when you spoke to me..."
 
5. Then she forced her cough a little more (немного усилила кашель) so that he should suffer from remorse just the same (чтобы и он страдал от угрызений совести точно так же). 
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love (несмотря на все добрые намерения, которые были неотделимы от его любви), had soon come to doubt her (вскоре начал в ней сомневаться: досл. пришёл к сомнению). He had taken seriously words which were without importance (воспринимал всерьез несерьезные слова: досл. брал серьезно слова, которые были без важности), and it made him very unhappy (от этого был несчастлив: досл. это делало его несчастливым). "I ought not to have listened to her (я не должен был ее слушать)," he confided (доверился) to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers (не надо слушать цветы). One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance (нужно просто смотреть на них и вдыхать их аромат). Mine perfumed all my planet (мой цветок сделал всю планету благоухающей). But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace (не знал, как найти удовольствие в ее изяществе). This tale of claws (басни о коготках), which disturbed me so much (которые меня так беспокоили), should only have filled my heart (наполняли моё сердце) with tenderness and pity (нежностью и состраданием)." 
And he continued his confidences (продолжал свое признание):
"The fact is (дело в том) that I did not know how to understand anything (не знал, как понять)! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words (я должен был судить по делам, а не по словам). She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me (окутывала меня своим ароматом и сиянием). I ought never to have run away (не должен был убегать) from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection (привязанность) that lay behind her poor little stratagems (которая скрывалась за ее маленькими бедными уловками: досл. лежало за…).
Flowers are so inconsistent (непоследовательны)! But I was too young to know how to love her... (но я был слишком юн, чтобы знать, как её любить)" 
5. Then she forced her cough a little more so that he should suffer from remorse just the same. 
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love, had soon come to doubt her. He had taken seriously words which were without importance, and it made him very unhappy. "I ought not to have listened to her," he confided to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers. One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance. Mine perfumed all my planet. But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace. This tale of claws, which disturbed me so much, should only have filled my heart with tenderness and pity." 
And he continued his confidences:
"The fact is that I did not know how to understand anything! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words. She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me. I ought never to have run away from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection that lay behind her poor little stratagems.
Flowers are so inconsistent! But I was too young to know how to love her..."

Chapter 9
1. I believe (верю) that for his escape (для его побега) he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds (он предпочел улететь со стаей диких птиц: досл. он взял преимущество миграции стаи диких птиц). On the morning of his departure (в утро его отбытия) he put his planet in perfect order (он привел планету в идеальный порядок). He carefully cleaned out (тщательно почистил) his active volcanoes. He possessed (владел) two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning (на них удобно было готовить завтрак по утрам: досл. они были удобны для того, чтобы жарить). He also had one volcano that was extinct (потухший). But, as he said (как он говорил), "One never knows! (кто его знает: досл. один никогда знает)" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out (хорошо почищены), volcanoes burn slowly and steadily (горят медленно и спокойно (монотонно)), without any eruptions (без каких-либо извержений). Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney (как огонь в дымоходе). 
On our earth (у нас: досл. на нашей земле) we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes (мы ещё не доросли до того, чтобы чистить наши вулканы). That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us (вот почему они нас постоянно беспокоят: досл. вот почему они не приносят конца проблем для нас). 
The little prince also pulled up (выполол), with a certain sense of dejection (с каким-то унынием: досл. с некоторым чувством уныния), the last little shoots of the baobabs (последние маленькие ростки баобабов). He believed that he would never want to return (он верил, что не захочет вернуться). But on this last morning (в то последнее утро) all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him (все эти обычные заботы (задания) были ему очень дороги). And when he watered the flower (полили цветок) for the last time, and prepared to place (приготовился поместить) her under the shelter of her glass globe (под стеклянный колпак), he realized (осознал) that he was very close to tears (что готов расплакаться: досл. был близок к слезам). "Goodbye," he said to the flower. 
But she made no answer (не ответила).
"Goodbye," he said again (опять).
The flower coughed (кашлянула). But it was not because she had a cold (но не потому, что ей было холодно).
"I have been silly (я была глупа)," she said to him, at last (наконец). "I ask your forgiveness (я прошу твоего прощения). Try to be happy (постарайся быть счастливым)..." 
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches (он был удивлён этим отсутствием упреков). He stood there all bewildered (он стоял там весь смущенный), the glass globe held arrested in mid-air (стеклянный колпак повис на полпути: досл. держался остановленным в «среднем воздухе»). He did not understand this quiet sweetness (этой тихой нежности).
"Of course I love you (конечно же я тебя люблю)," the flower said to him. "It is my fault (это моя вина) that you have not known it all the while (что ты не знал это все это время). That is of no importance (это неважно). But you (но ты) — you have been just as foolish as I (ты был таким же дураком, как и я). Try to be happy... let the glass globe be (оставь колпак). I don't want it any more (мне он больше не нужен: досл. я не хочу его больше)."
"But the wind (но ветер) — "
"My cold is not so bad as all that (моя простуда не так плоха как все это)... the cool night air will do me good (холодный ночной воздух мне полезен: досл. делает мне хорошо). I am a flower."
"But the animals (животные) —"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars (я должна вытерпеть присутствие двух или трех гусениц) if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies (если хочу познакомиться с бабочками). It seems that they are very beautiful (кажется, они очень красивые). And if not the butterflies – and the caterpillars — who will call upon me (кто будет со мной говорить)? You will be far away (ты будешь далеко)... as for the large animals (что касается больших животных) — I am not at all afraid of any of them (я вообще их не боюсь). I have my claws (когти)." 
And, naively (наивно), she showed her four thorns (шипы). Then she added: "Don't linger like this (не задерживайся здесь (сейчас)). You have decided to go away (ты решил уйти). Now go (так иди: досл. теперь иди)!" For she did not want him to see her crying (она не хотела, чтобы он видел ее плачущей). She was such a proud flower (она была таким гордым цветком)... 
1. I believe that for his escape he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds. On the morning of his departure he put his planet in perfect order. He carefully cleaned out his active volcanoes. He possessed two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning. He also had one volcano that was extinct. But, as he said, "One never knows!" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out, volcanoes burn slowly and steadily, without any eruptions. Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney. 
On our earth we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes. That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us. 
The little prince also pulled up, with a certain sense of dejection, the last little shoots of the baobabs. He believed that he would never want to return. But on this last morning all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him. And when he watered the flower for the last time, and prepared to place her under the shelter of her glass globe, he realized that he was very close to tears. "Goodbye," he said to the flower. 
But she made no answer.
"Goodbye," he said again.
The flower coughed. But it was not because she had a cold.
"I have been silly," she said to him, at last. "I ask your forgiveness. Try to be happy..." 
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches. He stood there all bewildered, the glass globe held arrested in mid-air. He did not understand this quiet sweetness.
"Of course I love you," the flower said to him. "It is my fault that you have not known it all the while. That is of no importance. But you - you have been just as foolish as I. Try to be happy... let the glass globe be. I don't want it any more."
"But the wind - "
"My cold is not so bad as all that... the cool night air will do me good. I am a flower."
"But the animals -"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies. It seems that they are very beautiful. And if not the butterflies - and the caterpillars - who will call upon me? You will be far away... as for the large animals - I am not at all afraid of any of them. I have my claws." 
And, naively, she showed her four thorns. Then she added: "Don't linger like this. You have decided to go away. Now go!" For she did not want him to see her crying. She was such a proud flower...
 

Chapter 10
1. He found himself in the neighborhood  (оказался по соседству: досл. нашел себя в соседстве) of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them (поэтому он начал с визита на них: «to begіn — began» — начать), in order to add to his knowledge (чтобы пополнить знания: «in order to» — для того, чтобы). 
The first of them was inhabited by a king (на первом жил король: досл. был населен королем). Clad in royal purple and ermine (одетый в королевское одеяние с горностаем ), he was seated upon a throne (он сидел на троне) which was at the same time both simple and majestic (который был прост и прекрасен: досл. который в одно и то же время был оба прост и прекрасен).
"Ah! Here is a subject (а вот и подчиненный)," exclaimed (воскликнул) the king, when he saw the little prince coming (когда увидел, как появился маленький принц: досл. увидел приходящего).
And the little prince asked himself (сам себя):
"How could he recognize (узнать) me when he had never seen me before (никогда не видел до того)?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings (что короли воспринимают мир упрощенно: досл. как мир упрощен для королей). To them, all men are subjects (для них все люди подданные).
"Approach, so that I may see you better, (подойди, дабы я мог видеть тебя лучше)" said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody (был невероятно горд быть королем хоть для кого-то). 
1. He found himself in the neighborhood of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them, in order to add to his knowledge 
The first of them was inhabited by a king. Clad in royal purple and ermine, he was seated upon a throne which was at the same time both simple and majestic.
"Ah! Here is a subject," exclaimed the king, when he saw the little prince coming.
And the little prince asked himself:
"How could he recognize me when he had never seen me before?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings. To them, all men are subjects.
"Approach, so that I may see you better," said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody.  
2. The little prince looked everywhere (огляделся: досл. смотрел везде) to find a place to sit down (присесть); but the entire (вся) planet was crammed (переполнен) and obstructed (загроможден) by the king's magnificent ermine robe (прекрасной королевской горностаевой мантией). So he remained standing upright (поэтому он стоял: досл. оставался стоять прямо), and, since he was tired (так как он устал), he yawned (зевнул: «to yawn — yawned» — зевать).
"It is contrary to etiquette (это перечит правилам этикета) to yawn in the presence of a king, (в присутствии короля)" the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so (я запрещаю тебе делать так)."
"I can't help it (ничего не поделаешь: досл. я не могу помочь этому). I can't stop myself (не могу остановиться)," replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed (совершенно сбитый с толку). "I have come on a long journey (я долго был в пути), and I have had no sleep (не спал: досл. не имел сна)…"
"Ah, then (ну тогда)," the king said. "I order you to yawn (приказываю тебе зевать). It is years since I have seen anyone yawning (я много лет уже не видел, как зевают). Yawns, to me (для меня), are objects of curiosity (интересны: досл. предмет любопытства). Come, now (Ну, давай)! Yawn again (зевни опять)! It is an order (это приказ)."
"That frightens (пугает) me... I cannot, any more..." murmured (пробормотал) the little prince, now completely abashed (совершенно сконфуженный).
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I - I order you sometimes to yawn (иногда зевать) and sometimes to - "
He sputtered (засуетился) a little, and seemed vexed (казалось огорчился).
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon (на чем король обстоятельно настаивал) was that his authority should be respected (чтобы его власть уважалась). He tolerated no disobedience (он не терпел непослушания). He was an absolute monarch (абсолютный монарх). But, because he was a very good man (но поскольку он был очень хорошим человеком), he made his orders reasonable (он делал свои приказы разумными).
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example (для примера: досл. дорогой примера), "if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird (превратиться на морскую птицу), and if the general did not obey me (не послушает), that would not be the fault of the general (это не была бы вина генерала). It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince (поступила застенчивая просьба от маленького принца).
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle (и величественно собрал складки своей мантии).
But the little prince was wondering (удивлен)... The planet was tiny (крошечная). Over what could this king really rule (чем мог король тут править)?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg (прошу) that you will excuse my asking you a question – (извинить меня за вопрос: досл. извинить мое задавание вопроса)"
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him (поспешил заверить его).
"Sire - over what do you rule (Сир — чем Вы правите)?"
"Over everything (всем)," said the king, with magnificent simplicity (с величественной простотой).
"Over everything?" 
The king made a gesture (жест), which took in his planet, the other planets, and all the stars (который захватил его планету, другие планеты и все звезды).
"Over all that (всем этим)?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered. 
For his rule was not only absolute (власть была не только абсолютной): it was also universal (также вселенской).
"And the stars obey you (звезды подчиняются Вам)?"
"Certainly they do (естественно: досл. конечно они так делают)," the king said. "They obey instantly (подчиняются немедля). I do not permit insubordination (не позволяю непослушания)." 
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at (такая власть удивляла маленького принца: досл. была предметом для маленького принца удивляться). If he had been master of such complete authority (если бы он располагал такой безграничной властью: досл. был хозяином такой полной власти), he would have been able to watch the sunset (он смог бы видеть закат), not forty-four times in one day (не 44 раза на день), but seventy-two (72), or even a hundred (даже 100), or even two hundred times (или даже 200), without ever having to move his chair (даже не передвигая стул). And because (потому) he felt a bit sad (он немного взгрустнул: досл. почувствовал немного грусти) as he remembered (вспомнил) his little planet which he had forsaken (которую он покинул: «to forsake — forsook — forsaken» — покидать, бросать), he plucked up his courage (фразеологизм: набрался храбрости) to ask the king a favor (попросить об услуге (милости):
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness (будьте так добры: досл. сделайте мне такое добро)... Order the sun to set (прикажите солнцу сесть)... "
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly (порхать с цветка на цветок, как бабочка), or to write a tragic drama (написать трагедию), or to change himself into a sea bird (превратиться в морскую птицу), and if the general did not carry out (выполнит) the order that he had received (приказ, который получил), which one of us would be in the wrong? (который из нас был бы неправ)" the king demanded (настаивал). "The general, or myself? (генерал или я)"
"You," said the little prince firmly (непоколебимо).
"Exactly (точно). One must require from each one (можно требовать от человека) the duty which each one can perform (обязанности, которые он может выполнить)," the king went on (продолжал). "Accepted authority (общепризнанная власть) rests first of all on reason (покоится прежде всего на разуме). If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea (броситься в море), they would rise up in revolution (они восстанут: досл. поднимутся в революции). I have the right to require obedience (у меня есть право требовать послушания) because my orders are reasonable (потому что мои приказы разумны)."
"Then my sunset (тогда как мой закат)?" the little prince reminded (напомнил) him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it (он никогда не забыл однажды заданных вопросов).
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it (я прикажу это). But, according to my science of government (согласно моей науке управления), I shall wait until conditions are favorable (я должен подождать благоприятных условий)."
"When will that be (когда это будет)?" inquired (осведомился) the little prince.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else (прежде, чем что-либо сказать) he consulted a bulky almanac (заглянул в большой календарь: досл. проконсультировался). "Hum! Hum! That will be about (это будет около) - about - that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight (сегодня вечером около 20 минут восьмого). And you will see how well I am obeyed (как меня почитают: досл. как меня слушают)."

2. The little prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down; but the entire planet was crammed and obstructed by the king's magnificent ermine robe. So he remained standing upright, and, since he was tired, he yawned.
"It is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king," the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so."
"I can't help it. I can't stop myself," replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed. "I have come on a long journey, and I have had no sleep..."
"Ah, then," the king said. "I order you to yawn. It is years since I have seen anyone yawning. Yawns, to me, are objects of curiosity. Come, now! Yawn again! It is an order."
"That frightens me... I cannot, any more..." murmured the little prince, now completely abashed.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I - I order you sometimes to yawn and sometimes to - "
He sputtered a little, and seemed vexed.
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon was that his authority should be respected. He tolerated no disobedience. He was an absolute monarch. But, because he was a very good man, he made his orders reasonable.
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example, "if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not obey me, that would not be the fault of the general. It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince.
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle.
But the little prince was wondering... The planet was tiny. Over what could this king really rule?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg that you will excuse my asking you a question - "
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him.
"Sire - over what do you rule?"
"Over everything," said the king, with magnificent simplicity.
"Over everything?" 
The king made a gesture, which took in his planet, the other planets, and all the stars.
"Over all that?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered. 
For his rule was not only absolute: it was also universal.
"And the stars obey you?"
"Certainly they do," the king said. "They obey instantly. I do not permit insubordination." 
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at. If he had been master of such complete authority, he would have been able to watch the sunset, not forty-four times in one day, but seventy-two, or even a hundred, or even two hundred times, with out ever having to move his chair. And because he felt a bit sad as he remembered his little planet which he had forsaken, he plucked up his courage to ask the king a favor:
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness... Order the sun to set..."
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly, or to write a tragic drama, or to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not carry out the order that he had received, which one of us would be in the wrong?" the king demanded. "The general, or myself?"
"You," said the little prince firmly.
"Exactly. One much require from each one the duty which each one can perform," the king went on. "Accepted authority rests first of all on reason. If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea, they would rise up in revolution. I have the right to require obedience because my orders are reasonable."
"Then my sunset?" the little prince reminded him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it.
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it. But, according to my science of government, I shall wait until conditions are favorable."
"When will that be?" inquired the little prince.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else he consulted a bulky almanac. "Hum! Hum! That will be about - about - that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight. And you will see how well I am obeyed."
3. The little prince yawned. He was regretting (сожалел) his lost (потерянный) sunset. And then, too, he was already beginning to be a little bored (ему уже стало скучно: досл. ему начинало становиться скучно).
"I have nothing more to do here (мне нечего больше здесь)," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again (поэтому я отправляюсь снова в путь)." "Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister (сделаю тебя министром)!"
"Minister of what (министром чего)?"
"Minster of - of Justice! (правосудия)"
"But there is nobody here to judge (но здесь некого судить)!"
"We do not know that (мы этого не знаем)," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom (я еще не осмотрел свои владения: досл. я еще не сделал полный обход). I am very old (я очень стар). There is no room (места) here for a carriage (повозка, карета). And it tires me to walk (ходьба меня утомляет)." 
"Oh, but I have looked already (я уже посмотрел)!" said the little prince, turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet (повернулся, чтобы еще раз взглянуть на другую сторону планеты). On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all (там, как и здесь, никого нет)...
"Then you shall judge yourself (будешь судить себя)," the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all (это тяжелее всего). It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others (значительно тяжелее судить себя самого, чем судить других). If you succeed in (если ты преуспеешь) judging yourself rightly (объективно), then you are indeed a man of true wisdom (ты станешь человеком истинной мудрости)."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere (судить себя можно везде). I do not need to live (мне не нужно жить) on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe (у меня есть причины полагать) that somewhere (где-то) on my planet there is an old rat (крыса). I hear him at night (слышу ее ночью). You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death (приговорить к смерти). Thus his life will depend on your justice (но ее жизнь будет зависеть от твоего правосудия). But you will pardon him on each occasion (будешь миловать каждый раз); for he must be treated thriftily (к ней надо относиться бережно). He is the only one we have (она у нас одна-единственная)."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death (мне не нравится приговаривать к смерти). And now I think I will go on my way (я, пожалуй, пойду)."
"No," said the king. 
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure (закончив приготовления к отбытию), had no wish to grieve the old monarch (не хотел печалить старого монарха).
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed (полного подчинения)," he said, "he should be able to give me a reasonable order (сможет дать мне разумный приказ). He should be able, for example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute (приказать мне уйти по истечению этой минуты). It seems to me that conditions are favorable (мне кажется, что условия подходящие)..."
As the king made no answer (не ответил: досл. не сделал ответа), the little prince hesitated (колебался) a moment. Then, with a sigh (вздох), he took his leave (отбыл: досл. взял свой уход).
"I made you my Ambassador (посол)," the king called out (выкрикнул), hastily (поспешно).
He had a magnificent air of authority (его власть была удивительна (прекрасна)).
"The grown-ups are very strange (странные)," the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey (продолжал свой путь).
3. The little prince yawned. He was regretting his lost sunset. And then, too, he was already beginning to be a little bored.
"I have nothing more to do here," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again." "Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister!"
"Minister of what?"
"Minster of - of Justice!"
"But there is nobody here to judge!"
"We do not know that," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom. I am very old. There is no room here for a carriage. And it tires me to walk." 
"Oh, but I have looked already!" said the little prince, turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet. On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all...
"Then you shall judge yourself," the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all. It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others. If you succeed in judging yourself rightly, then you are indeed a man of true wisdom."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere. I do not need to live on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe that somewhere on my planet there is an old rat. I hear him at night. You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death. Thus his life will depend on your justice. But you will pardon him on each occasion; for he must be treated thriftily. He is the only one we have."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death. And now I think I will go on my way."
"No," said the king. 
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure, had no wish to grieve the old monarch.
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed," he said, "he should be able to give me a reasonable order. He should be able, for example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute. It seems to me that conditions are favorable..."
As the king made no answer, the little prince hesitated a moment. Then, with a sigh, he took his leave.
"I made you my Ambassador," the king called out, hastily.
He had a magnificent air of authority.
"The grown-ups are very strange," the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 11
1. The second planet was inhabited (вторая планета была населена) by a conceited man (себялюбцем: досл. тщеславным, самоуверенным человеком). "Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer (кажется, у меня поклонник: досл. я есть около получения визита почитателем)!" he exclaimed from afar (издали), when he first (впервые) saw the little prince coming (пришел).
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers (для тщеславного все другие — поклонники). 
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing (какая у Вас чудная шляпа: досл. это чудная шляпа Вы носите)."
"It is a hat for salutes (для приветствия)," the conceited man replied (ответил). "It is to raise in salute (дабы поднимать ее в приветствии) when people acclaim (шумно приветствовать) me. Unfortunately (к сожалению), nobody at all ever passes this way (вообще никто никогда здесь не проходил)."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about (не понимал, о чем говорит тщеславный человек).
"Clap your hands, one against the other (хлопни, ударь ладонями друг по другу)," the conceited man now directed (приказал) him. 
1. The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man. "Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!" he exclaimed from afar, when he first saw the little prince coming.
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers. 
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing."
"It is a hat for salutes," the conceited man replied. "It is to raise in salute when people acclaim me. Unfortunately, nobody at all ever passes this way."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about.
"Clap your hands, one against the other," the conceited man now directed him. 

 
2. The little prince clapped his hands (хлопнул). The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute (поднял шляпу в скромном приветствии).
"This is more entertaining (куда занимательнее) than the visit to the king (чем визит к королю)," the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands (начал опять хлопать), one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise (после пяти минут таких упражнений) the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony (устал от монотонности игры).
"And what should one do to make the hat come down (что нужно сделать, дабы шляпа упала, опустилась)?" he asked. 
But the conceited man did not hear him (не слышал его). Conceited people never hear anything but praise (себялюбцы не слышат ничего, кроме похвалы).
"Do you really admire me very much (ты действительно мной восхищен)?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean - 'admire' (что значит — восхищен)?"
"To admire mean that you regard me (расцениваешь меня) as the handsomest (наиболее симпатичного), the best-dressed (наилучше одетого), the richest (наибогатейшего), and the most intelligent (самого умного) man on this planet."
"But you are the only man (единственный) on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness (сделай милость). Admire me just the same (именно так)."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly (слегка пожав плечами), "but what is there in that to interest you so much (что в этом такого интересного)?"
And the little prince went away (ушел).
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd (взрослые действительно очень странные)," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey (продолжил путешествие). 
2. The little prince clapped his hands. The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute.
"This is more entertaining than the visit to the king," the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands, one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony.
"And what should one do to make the hat come down?" he asked. 
But the conceited man did not hear him. Conceited people never hear anything but praise.
"Do you really admire me very much?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean - 'admire'?"
"To admire mean that you regard me as the handsomest, the best-dressed, the richest, and the most intelligent man on this planet."
"But you are the only man on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness. Admire me just the same."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly, "but what is there in that to interest you so much?"
And the little prince went away.
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 12
1.The next planet was inhabited by a tippler (на следующей планете жил пьяница: досл. следующая планета была населена пьяницей). This was a very short visit (очень короткий визит), but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection (поверг в уныние).
"What are you doing there (что ты здесь делаешь)?" he said to the tippler, whom he found (которого он нашел) settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles (сидевшего в тишине перед коллекцией пустых бутылок) and also a collection of full bottles (а также полных).
"I am drinking (я пью)," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air (скорбно: досл. со скорбным воздухом). 
1.The next planet was inhabited by a tippler. This was a very short visit, but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection.
"What are you doing there?" he said to the tippler, whom he found settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles and also a collection of full bottles.
"I am drinking," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air. 

 
2. "Why are you drinking (почему ты пьешь)?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget (так я могу забыть)," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired (осведомился) the little prince, who already was sorry for him (который уже жалел его).
"Forget that I am ashamed (что мне стыдно)," the tippler confessed (сознался), hanging his head (свесив голову).
"Ashamed of what (стыдно чего)?" insisted (настаивал) the little prince, who wanted to help him (который хотел ему помочь).
"Ashamed of drinking (стыдно, что пью)!" The tippler brought his speech to an end (высказал все: досл. принес свою речь до конца), and shut himself up in an impregnable silence (и замолчал: досл. замкнул себя в неприступную тишину).
And the little prince went away (ушел прочь), puzzled (озадаченный).
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.
2. "Why are you drinking?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired the little prince, who already was sorry for him.
"Forget that I am ashamed," the tippler confessed, hanging his head.
"Ashamed of what?" insisted the little prince, who wanted to help him.
"Ashamed of drinking!" The tippler brought his speech to an end, and shut himself up in an impregnable silence.
And the little prince went away, puzzled.
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.  

Chapter 13
1. The fourth (четвертая) planet belonged to a businessman (принадлежала бизнесмену). This man was so much occupied (занят) that he did not even raise his head (даже не поднял головы) at the little prince's arrival (по прибытии маленького принца).
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out (погасла)."
"Three and two make five (3 + 2 = 5). Five and seven make twelve (5 + 7 = 12). Twelve and three make fifteen (12 + 3 = 15). Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two (15 + 7 = 22). Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight (22 + 6 = 28). I haven't time to light it again (у меня нет времени ее зажечь). Twenty-six and five make thirty-one (26 + 5 = 31). Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one (итого: досл. это делает 501 622 731)."
1. The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. This man was so much occupied that he did not even raise his head at the little prince's arrival.
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out."
"Three and two make five. Five and seven make twelve. Twelve and three make fifteen. Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two. Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight. I haven't time to light it again. Twenty-six and five make thirty-one. Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one."  
 
2. "Five hundred million what (5 миллионов чего)?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there (ты все еще здесь)? Five-hundred-and-one million (501 миллион) - I can't stop (не могу остановиться)... 
I have so much to do (столько нужно сделать: досл. у меня есть так много делать)! I am concerned with matters of consequence (забочусь о делах особой важности). I don't amuse myself with balderdash (не отвлекаюсь на ерунду). Two and five make seven (2 + 5 = 7)..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had (никогда в своей жизни) let go of a question once he had asked it (не оставлял вопрос, однажды заданный). 
The businessman raised his head. 
"During the fifty-four years (54 года) that I have inhabited this planet, I have been disturbed only three times (меня беспокоили (отвлекали) только трижды). The first time was twenty-two years ago (первый раз 22 года назад), when some giddy goose (легкомысленный дурак (или пустоголовая гусыня)) fell from goodness knows where (неизвестно откуда). He made the most frightful noise (он поднял такой ужасный шум) that resounded all over the place (отзвуки которого были везде: досл. который «отзвучивал», «to sound» —  звучать, «to resound» —  звучать повторно), and I made four mistakes in my addition (допустил 4 ошибки в подсчетах). The second time, eleven years ago (11 лет назад), I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism (приступ ревматизма). I don't get enough exercise (мало двигался: досл. не делал достаточно упражнений). I have no time for loafing («ничегонеделания»). The third time (3 раз) — well, this is it (это он и есть)! I was saying, then (я говорил, значит), five-hundred-and-one millions — "
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace (осознал, что ему не будет покоя: досл. нет надежды быть оставленным в покое) until he answered this question (пока не ответит).
"Millions of those little objects (этих маленьких штучек)," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the sky (которые можно увидеть в небе)."
"Flies (мухи)?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects (сверкающие штучки)."
"Bees (пчелы)?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects (маленькие золотые штучки) that set lazy men to idle dreaming (которые располагают ленивых людей к бесполезным мечтаниям). As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars (имеете в виду звезды)?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do (что Вы делаете) with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate (точный)."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them (Ничего. Они мне принадлежат: досл. я ими владею)."
"You own the stars?"
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who — (но я уже видел короля, который —) "
"Kings do not own, they reign over (короли не владеют, они правят). It is a very different matter (разные вещи)."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars (и что хорошего во владении звездами)?"
"It  does me the good of making me rich (то, что я богат: досл. это делает мне хорошо делая меня богатым)."
"And what good does it do you to be rich (быть богатым)?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars (могу купить больше звезд: досл. это делает это возможным для меня купить больше звезд), if any are ever discovered (если какие-либо откроют)."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor tippler (рассуждает, как мой бедный пьяница)..." 
2. "Five hundred million what?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there? Five-hundred-and-one million - I can't stop... 
I have so much to do! I am concerned with matters of consequence. I don't amuse myself with balderdash. Two and five make seven..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question once he had asked it. 
The businessman raised his head. 
"During the fifty-four years that I have inhabited this planet, I have been disturbed only three times. The first time was twenty-two years ago, when some giddy goose fell from goodness knows where. He made the most frightful noise that resounded all over the place, and I made four mistakes in my addition. The second time, eleven years ago, I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism. I don't get enough exercise. I have no time for loafing. The third time - well, this is it! I was saying, then, five -hundred-and-one millions - "
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace until he answered this question.
"Millions of those little objects," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the sky."
"Flies?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects."
"Bees?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects that set lazy men to idle dreaming. As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them."
"You own the stars?"
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who - "
"Kings do not own, they reign over. It is a very different matter."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars?"
"It does me the good of making me rich."
"And what good does it do you to be rich?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars, if any are ever discovered."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor tippler..."
3. Nevertheless (все же), he still had some more questions (у него все еще были вопросы). 
"How is it possible for one to own the stars (как можно владеть звездами: досл. как это возможно для одного)?"
"To whom do they belong (кому они принадлежат)?" the businessman retorted (возразил), peevishly (раздраженно).
"I don't know. To nobody (не знаю. Никому)."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it (потому что я первый об этом полумал)."
"Is that all that is necessary (и это все, что нужно)?"
"Certainly (конечно). When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours (когда ты находишь бриллиант, который никому не принадлежит, — он твой). When you discover an island (открываешь остров) that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea (появляется идея) before any one else (прежде других), you take out a patent on it (получаешь патент): it is yours. So with me (так и я): I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them (никто раньше меня не додумался ими владеть)."
"Yes, that is true (правда)," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them (а что Вы с ними делаете)?"
"I administer them (управляю ими)," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them (считаю и пересчитываю). It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence (заинтересован в делах особой важности)." 
The little prince was still not satisfied (маленькому принцу было мало: досл. все еще не был удовлетворен). 
"If I owned a silk scarf (у меня есть шелковый шарф)," he said, "I could put it around my neck (я завязываю его на шее) and take it away with me (беру с собой). If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with me (вырвать цветок и забрать с собой). But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven (не можете сорвать звезды с небес)..."
"No. But I can put them in the bank (положить в банк)."
"Whatever does that mean (а это что значит)?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper (маленький листик). And then I put this paper in a drawer (ящик) and lock it with a key (запираю на ключ)."
"And that is all (и все?)?"
"That is enough (достаточно)," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining (смешно)," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic (скорее поэтично). But it is of no great consequence." 
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups (дела особой важности маленький принц представлял совсем не так, как взрослые). 
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation (разговор) with the businessman, "which I water (поливаю) every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows (кто его знает)). It is of some use (польза) to my volcanoes , and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them (от того, что я ими владею). But you are of no use to the stars (но звездам нет никакой пользы)..." 
The businessman opened his mouth (открыл рот), but he found nothing to say in answer (не нашел что сказать в ответ). 
And the little prince went away. 
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether (совершенно) extraordinary," he said simply (просто), talking to himself as he continued on his journey (разговаривая сам с собой и продолжая путешествие).
3. Nevertheless, he still had some more questions. 
"How is it possible for one to own the stars?"
"To whom do they belong?" the businessman retorted, peevishly.
"I don't know. To nobody."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it."
"Is that all that is necessary?"
"Certainly. When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you discover an island that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea before any one else, you take out a patent on it: it is yours. So with me: I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them."
"Yes, that is true," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them?"
"I administer them," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them. It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence." 
The little prince was still not satisfied. 
"If I owned a silk scarf," he said, "I could put it around my neck and take it away with me. If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with me. But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven..."
"No. But I can put them in the bank."
"Whatever does that mean?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper. And then I put this paper in a drawer and lock it with a key."
"And that is all?"
"That is enough," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic. But it is of no great consequence." 
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups. 
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation with the businessman, "which I water every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows). It is of some use to my volcanoes , and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them. But you are of no use to the stars..." 
The businessman opened his mouth, but he found nothing to say in answer. 
And the little prince went away. 
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary," he said simply, talking to himself as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 14
1. The fifth (пятая) planet was very strange (странная). It was the smallest of all (наименьшая изо всех). There was just enough room (как раз достаточно места) on it for a street lamp (уличного фонаря) and a lamplighter (фонарщика). The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of (маленький принц не мог объяснить, какая польза от: досл. был не в состоянии достигнуть какого-либо объяснения использования) a street lamp and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens (где-то в небесах), on a planet which had no people (без людей), and not one house (ни единого дома). But he said to himself, nevertheless (все же):
"It may well be (вполне может быть) that this man is absurd (ненормален). But he is not so (но не так) absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler (король, тщеславный человек, бизнесмен и пьяница). For at least his work has some meaning (его труд имеет хоть какой-то смысл). When he lights his street lamp (когда он зажигает фонарь), it is as if he brought one more star to life (он будто дает жизнь еще одной звезде), or one flower. When he puts out (гасит) his lamp, he sends (отправляет) the flower, or the star, to sleep (спать). That is a beautiful occupation (чудесное занятие). And since it is beautiful (поскольку это прекрасно), it is truly useful (это действительно полезно)."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully (почтенно) saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why (почему) have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders (таков порядок (так заведено))," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted (зажег) his lamp again. 
1. The fifth planet was very strange. It was the smallest of all. There was just enough room on it for a street lamp and a lamplighter. The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of a street lamp and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens, on a planet which had no people, and not one house. But he said to himself, nevertheless:
"It may well be that this man is absurd. But he is not so absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler. For at least his work has some meaning. When he lights his street lamp, it is as if he brought one more star to life, or one flower. When he puts out his lamp, he sends the flower, or the star, to sleep. That is a beautiful occupation. And since it is beautiful, it is truly useful."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted his lamp again.
 
2. "But why have you just lighted it again? (почему зажгли снова)"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. 
"I do not understand (не понимаю)," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand (нечего понимать: досл. есть ничего понимать)," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders (порядок — это порядок (ход вещей)). Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead (вытер лоб) with a handkerchief (носовым платком) decorated with red squares (украшенным красными звездами). 
"I follow a terrible profession (у меня ужасная профессия: досл. я следую ужасной профессии). In the old days (в прежние времена: досл. в старые дни) it was reasonable (это было разумно). I put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation (весь остаток дня я отдыхал: досл. имел для отдыха) and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time (ход вещей изменился с тех пор)?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the tragedy (вот в чем беда)! From year to year (из года в год) the planet has turned more rapidly (планета поворачивалась более резко) and the orders have not been changed!"
"Then what (что тогда)?" asked the little prince.
"Then — the planet now makes a complete turn every minute (теперь планета делает полный оборот за 1 минуту), and I no longer have a single second for repose (у меня нет ни единой секунды для отдыха). Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!"
"That is very funny (забавно)! A day lasts (день длится) only one minute, here where you live (здесь, где Вы живете)!"
"It is not funny at all (вовсе)!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking together a month has gone by (пока мы разговаривали, прошел месяц)."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes (30 минут). Thirty days. Good evening."
2. "But why have you just lighted it again?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. 
"I do not understand," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders. Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead with a handkerchief decorated with red squares. 
"I follow a terrible profession. In the old days it was reasonable. I put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the tragedy! From year to year the planet has turned more rapidly and the orders have not been changed!"
"Then what?" asked the little prince.
"Then-- the planet now makes a complete turn every minute, and I no longer have a single second for repose. Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!"
"That is very funny! A day lasts only one minute, here where you live!"
"It is not funny at all!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking together a month has gone by."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes. Thirty days. Good evening."
 3. And he lighted his lamp again. As the little prince watched him (наблюдал за ним), he felt that he loved (он чувствовал, что он любит) this lamplighter who was so faithful (который так верен) to his orders. He remembered the sunsets (он помнил закаты) which he himself had gone to seek (которые он сам отправился искать (к которым стремился)), in other days, merely by pulling up his chair (в основном передвигая стул); and he wanted to help (захотел помочь) his friend. 
"You know (знаете)," he said, "I can tell you a way (могу подсказать: досл. могу сказать путь) you can rest whenever you want to (отдыхать, когда бы Вы ни захотели)..."
"I always (всегда) want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible (это возможно) for a man to be faithful and lazy (ленивым) at the same time (в одно и то же время). 
The little prince went on (продолжил) with his explanation (объяснение):
"Your planet is so small (так мала) that three strides will take you all the way around it (можно обойти в три шага). To be always in the sunshine (находиться в солнечном свете), you need only walk along rather slowly (нужно только идти довольно медленно). When you want to rest, you will walk (будешь идти) - and the day will last as long as you like (день будет длиться столько, сколько ты захочешь)."
"That doesn't do me much good (мне о этого мало проку: досл. это не делает мне много хорошего)," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in life is to sleep (одна вещь, которую я люблю в жизни, это сон)."
"Then you're unlucky (тогда Вам не повезло: досл. ты неудачлив)," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp. 
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey (продолжал дальше свое путешествие), "that man would be scorned by all the others (был бы осмеян другими): by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless (и все же) he is the only one of them all (он единственный из всех их) who does not seem to me ridiculous (кто для меня не смешен). Perhaps that is because (может это потому) he is thinking of something else besides himself (он думает о чем-то еще, кроме себя)." 
He breathed a sigh of regret (вздохнул: досл. выдохнул вздох сожаления), and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend (кого я бы сделал моим другом). But his planet is indeed (в самом деле) too small. There is no room on it for two people (нет места для двоих)..." 
What the little prince did not dare confess (не осмелился сознаться) was that he was sorry most of all to leave this planet (сожалел о том, что покидает эту планету, больше всего), because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets (она освещалась каждый день 1440 закатами)! 
3. And he lighted his lamp again. As the little prince watched him, he felt that he loved this lamplighter who was so faithful to his orders. He remembered the sunsets which he himself had gone to seek, in other days, merely by pulling up his chair; and he wanted to help his friend. 
"You know," he said, "I can tell you a way you can rest whenever you want to..."
"I always want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible for a man to be faithful and lazy at the same time. 
The little prince went on with his explanation:
"Your planet is so small that three strides will take you all the way around it. To be always in the sunshine, you need only walk along rather slowly. When you want to rest, you will walk - and the day will last as long as you like."
"That doesn't do me much good," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in life is to sleep."
"Then you're unlucky," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp. 
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey, "that man would be scorned by all the others: by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless he is the only one of them all who does not seem to me ridiculous. Perhaps that is because he is thinking of something else besides himself." 
He breathed a sigh of regret, and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend. But his planet is indeed too small. There is no room on it for two people..." 
What the little prince did not dare confess was that he was sorry most of all to leave this planet, because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets!

Chapter 15
1. The sixth (шестая) planet was ten times larger than the last one (в десять раз больше предыдущей). It was inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books (многотомные книги).
"Oh, look (посмотри)! Here is an explorer (исследователь)!" he exclaimed to himself (воскликнул сам себе) when he saw the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table (сел на стол) and panted a little (тяжело и часто дышал немного). He had already traveled so much and so far (он у же так много и так далеко прошел (путешествовал))! 
1. The sixth planet was ten times larger than the last one. It was inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books.
"Oh, look! Here is an explorer!" he exclaimed to himself when he saw the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table and panted a little. He had already traveled so much and so far!
 
2. "Where do you come from (откуда ты пришел)?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book (что это за большая книга)?" said the little prince. "What are you doing (что Вы делаете)?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer (кто такой географ)?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar (ученый) who knows the location (знает месторасположение) of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts (морей, рек, городов, гор и пустынь)."
"That is very interesting (это очень интересно)," said the little prince. 
"Here at last (наконец) is a man who has a real profession (человек, у которого настоящая профессия)!" 
And he cast a look around him (оглянулся: досл. бросил взгляд кругом него) at the planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet (наиболее красивая и величественная планета) that he had ever seen (которую он когда-либо видел).
"Your planet is very beautiful (прекрасна)," he said. "Has it any oceans (на ней есть океаны)?"
"I couldn't tell you (не могу сказать)," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed (был разочарован). "Has it any mountains (а горы: досл. имеет она какие-либо горы)?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either (также)."
"But you are a geographer (но Вы же географ)!"
"Exactly (правильно)," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer (но не исследователь). I haven't a single explorer on my planet (нет ни единого исследователя на моей планете). It is not the geographer (это не географ) who goes out to count (кто отправляется считать) the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about (географ слишком важен дабы везде слоняться). He does not leave his desk (не встает из-за стола: досл. не покидает свою парту). But he receives the explorers in his study (он получает исследователей для научной работы). He asks them questions (задает вопросы), and he notes down (записывает) what they recall of their travels (то, что они вспоминают о своих путешествиях). And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting to him (воспоминания кого-то среди них кажутся ему интересными), the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral character (убедиться в моральности исследователя: досл. требует подтверждения морального характера исследователя)."
"Why is that (зачем)?"
"Because an explorer who told lies (который лжет: досл.говорит неправду) would bring disaster on the books of the geographer (принесет несчастья книгам географа). So would an explorer who drank too much (Так может быть, если исследователь пьет)."
"Why is that (почему)?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double (у пьяного в глазах двоится: досл. видит дважды). Then the geographer would note down two mountains (записать две горы) in a place where there was only one (на месте одной)."
"I know some one (знаю одного человека)," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer (был бы плохим исследователем)."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good (моральность подтверждена: досл. моральный характер показывается как хороший), an inquiry is ordered into his discovery (убедиться в истинности его открытия)." 
"One goes to see it (нужно пойти увидеть его)?"
"No. That would be too complicated (было бы слишком сложно). But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs (у исследователя требуют предоставить доказательства). For example, if the discovery in question (открытие под вопросом) is that of a large mountain (это большая гора), one requires that large stones be brought back from it (требуют большой камень с этой горы)."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement (внезапно заволновался).
"But you - you come from far away (ты, ты пришел издалека)! You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me (должен описать планету)!"
And, having opened his big register (открыл свой большой журнал), the geographer sharpened his pencil (заточил свой карандаш). 
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil (факты сначала записывают карандашом). One waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink (ждут подтверждения перед тем, как записать это чернилами). 
2. "Where do you come from?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book?" said the little prince. "What are you doing?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar who knows the location of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts."
"That is very interesting," said the little prince. 
"Here at last is a man who has a real profession!" 
And he cast a look around him at the planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet that he had ever seen.
"Your planet is very beautiful," he said. "Has it any oceans?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed. "Has it any mountains?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either."
"But you are a geographer!"
"Exactly," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer. I haven't a single explorer on my planet. It is not the geographer who goes out to count the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about. He does not leave his desk. But he receives the explorers in his study. He asks them questions, and he notes down what they recall of their travels. And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting to him, the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral character."
"Why is that?"
"Because an explorer who told lies would bring disaster on the books of the geographer. So would an explorer who drank too much."
"Why is that?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double. Then the geographer would note down two mountains in a place where there was only one."
"I know some one," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good, an inquiry is ordered into his discovery." 
"One goes to see it?"
"No. That would be too complicated. But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs. For example, if the discovery in question is that of a large mountain, one requires that large stones be brought back from it."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement.
"But you - you come from far away! You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me!"
And, having opened his big register, the geographer sharpened his pencil. 
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil. One waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink.
3. "Well (ну)?" said the geographer expectantly (в ожидании).
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting (не очень интересно). It is all so small (все очень маленькое). I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows (кто его знает)."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers (мы не записываем цветов)," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet (цветок — это самое красивое на моей планете)!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are ephemeral (эфемерны, недолговечны)."
"What does that mean (что это значит) — 'ephemeral'?" 
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are most concerned with matters of consequence (географии — это книги, которые заняты делами особой важности). They never become old-fashioned (они никогда не устаревают). It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position (очень редко горы меняют месторасположение). It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters (океаны высыхают). We write of eternal things (мы пишем о вечном)."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again (потухший вулкан может «ожить» опять)," the little prince interrupted (прервал). "What does that mean — 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive (потухший он или нет), it comes to the same thing for us (нам все равно: досл. для нас идет как одна и та же вещь)," said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain (для нас важны горы). It does not change (они не меняются)."
"But what does that mean — 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it (не оставлял однажды заданный вопрос).
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance (такой, какой пребывает в опасности быстрого исчезновения).'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is."
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world (у нее только 4 шипа, чтобы защитить себя от мира). And I have left her on my planet, all alone (оставил ее на планете, совсем одну)!" 
That was his first moment of regret (первое сожаление: досл. момент сожаления). But he took courage once more (набрался храбрости еще раз).
"What place would you advise me to visit now (какую планету Вы бы посоветовали мне посетить)?" he asked.
"The planet Earth (планету Земля)," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation (у нее хорошая репутация)."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower (ушел думая о цветке). 
3. "Well?" said the geographer expectantly.
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting. It is all so small. I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are ephemeral."
"What does that mean-- 'ephemeral'?" 
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are most concerned with matters of consequence. They never become old-fashioned. It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position. It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters. We write of eternal things."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again," the little prince interrupted. "What does that mean - 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive, it comes to the same thing for us," said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain. It does not change."
"But what does that mean - 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it.
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance.'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is."
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world. And I have left her on my planet, all alone!" 
That was his first moment of regret. But he took courage once more.
"What place would you advise me to visit now?" he asked.
"The planet Earth," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower.



Chapter 16
1. So then the seventh planet was the Earth (наконец седьмой планетой была Земля).
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet (не просто обычная планета)! One can count (можно подсчитать: досл. один может подсчитать), there 111 kings (королей) (not forgetting, to be sure (не забывая, естественно), the Negro kings among them (короли африканских стран в том числе)), 7000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men - that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups (в общем, около 2 млрд. взрослых). 
1. So then the seventh planet was the Earth.
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet! One can count, there 111 kings (not forgetting, to be sure, the Negro kings among them), 7000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men - that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups.
 
2. To give you an idea of the size of the Earth (чтобы вы представили себе размеры Земли: досл. дать вам идею), I will tell you that before the invention of electricity (я скажу, что до открытия электричества) it was necessary to maintain (необходимо содержать), over the whole of the six continents (по всем 6 континентам), a veritable army (настоящую армию) of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps. 
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle (вблизи это было бы роскошное зрелище: досл. «видимое» из незначительного расстояния, это сделало бы роскошное представление). The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera (движение этой армии было бы упорядочено, как в балете). First would come the turn of the lamplighters (сначала бы шли фонарщики: досл. первая пришла бы очередь) of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight (засветив свои фонари), these would go off to sleep (они пошли бы спать). 
Next (следующие), the lamplighters of China (Китай) and Siberia would enter (вошли бы) for their steps in the dance (танцуя), and then they too would be waved back into the wings (скрылись бы за кулисами). After that (после этого) would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the stage (никогда не ошиблись бы в порядке выхода на сцену). It would be magnificent (удивительно).
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole (и только человек, ответственный за единственный фонарь на Северном полюсе), and his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole - only these two (только эти двое) would live free from toil and care (жили бы без забот: досл. жили бы свободными от тяжелой работы и заботы): they would be busy twice a year (они были бы заняты дважды в год).
2. To give you an idea of the size of the Earth, I will tell you that before the invention of electricity it was necessary to maintain, over the whole of the six continents, a veritable army of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps. 
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle. The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera. First would come the turn of the lamplighters of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight, these would go off to sleep. 
Next, the lamplighters of China and Siberia would enter for their steps in the dance, and then they too would be waved back into the wings. After that would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the stage. It would be magnificent.
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole, and his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole - only these two would live free from toil and care: they would be busy twice a year.  

Chapter 17
1. When one wishes to play the wit (блеснуть остроумием: «wit» — разум), he sometimes wanders a little from the truth (досл. «уходит немного от правды»). I have not been altogether honest (я не был совсем честен) in what I have told you about the lamplighters (в том, что я рассказал вам о фонарщиках). And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it (я осознаю, что могу создать неправильное представление о нашей планете для тех, кто с ней не знаком: досл. «рискую дать фальшивую идею о…»). Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth (люди занимают очень мало места на Земле). If the two billion inhabitants (2 биллиона жителей) who people its surface (заселяют ее поверхность: «people» не только «люди», но и «заселять») were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together (все стали толпой), as they do for some big public assembly (как они то делают на публичных собраниях), they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide (они легко поместились бы на площади 20 миль длиной и 20 шириной). All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet (все человечество могло бы поместиться на маленьком тихоокеанском островке). 
The grown-ups, to be sure (естественно), will not believe you when you tell them that (не поверят, если вы им это скажете). They imagine that they fill a great deal of space (им кажется, что они занимают огромное пространство). They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs (они возомнили себя такими же важными, как и баобабы). You should advise them, then, to make their own calculations (можете предложить им провести свои подсчеты). They adore figures (они обожают цифры), and that will please them (им это понравится). But do not waste your time on this extra task (не тратьте время на это задание). It is unnecessary (это не понадобится). You have, I know, confidence in me (я знаю, что вы мне доверяете).
1. When one wishes to play the wit, he sometimes wanders a little from the truth. I have not been altogether honest in what I have told you about the lamplighters. And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it. Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth. If the two billion inhabitants who people its surface were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together, as they do for some big public assembly, they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide. All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet. 
The grown-ups, to be sure, will not believe you when you tell them that. They imagine that they fill a great deal of space. They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs. You should advise them, then, to make their own calculations. They adore figures, and that will please them. But do not waste your time on this extra task. It is unnecessary. You have, I know, confidence in me. 
2. When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people (был удивлен, не увидев людей). He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet (он уже начинал бояться, что прибыл не на ту планету), when a coil of gold (клубок золота), the colour of the moonlight (цвета лунного сияния), flashed across the sand (вспыхнул на песке).
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously (вежливо).
"Good evening," said the snake (змея).
"What planet is this on which I have come down? (что это за планета (на которую я прилетел)?)" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth (так на Земле нет людей)?"
"This is the desert (пустыня). There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large (большая)," said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone (присел на камень), and raised his eyes toward the sky (поднял в небо глаза). 
"I wonder (интересно)," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us may find his own again (зажигаются ли звезды в небе для того, чтобы однажды один из нас мог отыскать свою опять)... Look at my planet. It is right there above us (прямо над нами). But how far away it is! (но как она далеко)""It is beautiful (прекрасна)," the snake said. "What has brought you here (как тебя сюда занесло: досл. что тебя сюда принесло)?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower (у меня были проблемы с цветком)," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake. 
And they were both silent (оба молчали). 
"Where are the men (где люди)?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again (возобновил разговор). "It is a little lonely in the desert (немного одиноко в пустыне)..."
"It is also lonely among men (среди людей тоже одиноко)," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time (долго смотрел на нее). 
2. When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people. He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet, when a coil of gold, the colour of the moonlight, flashed across the sand.
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously.
"Good evening," said the snake.
"What planet is this on which I have come down?" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth?"
"This is the desert. There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large," said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his eyes toward the sky. 
"I wonder," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us may find his own again... Look at my planet. It is right there above us. But how far away it is!""It is beautiful," the snake said. "What has brought you here?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake. 
And they were both silent. 
"Where are the men?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again. "It is a little lonely in the desert..."
"It is also lonely among men," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time.
 
3."You are a funny animal (забавное животное)," he said at last (наконец-то). "You are no thicker than a finger (не толще пальца)..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king (я более могущественна, чем палец короля)," said the snake. 
The little prince smiled (улыбнулся). 
"You are not very powerful (ты не очень могущественна). You haven't even any feet (у тебя даже ног нет). You cannot even travel (ты даже путешествовать не можешь)..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you (я могу отнести тебя дальше, чем любой корабль)," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle (она обвилась вокруг лодыжки маленького принца), like a golden bracelet. 
"Whomever I touch (к кому бы я ни прикоснулась), I send back to the earth from whence he came (я отправляю его в землю, откуда он и пришел)," the snake spoke again. "But you are innocent (невинен) and true (правдивый), and you come from a star..." 
The little prince made no reply (не ответил).
"You move me to pity (мне тебя жаль: досл. ты двигаешь меня к жалости) - you are so weak (так беспомощен, слаб) on this Earth made of granite," the snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet (если станешь слишком скучать по своей планете). I can - "
"Oh! I understand you very well (понимаю очень хорошо)," said the little prince. "But why do you always speak in riddles (почему ты постоянно говоришь загадками)?"
"I solve them all (я из разгадываю)," said the snake.
And they were both silent. 
3."You are a funny animal," he said at last. "You are no thicker than a finger..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king," said the snake. 
The little prince smiled. 
"You are not very powerful. You haven't even any feet. You cannot even travel..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle, like a golden bracelet. 
"Whomever I touch, I send back to the earth from whence he came," the snake spoke again. "But you are innocent and true, and you come from a star..." 
The little prince made no reply.
"You move me to pity - you are so weak on this Earth made of granite," the snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet. I can - "
"Oh! I understand you very well," said the little prince. "But why do you always speak in riddles?"
"I solve them all," said the snake.
And they were both silent.   
  

Chapter 18
1.The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower (пересек пустыню и встретил только один цветок). 
It was a flower with three petals (это был цветок с тремя лепестками), a flower of no account at all (ничего особенного собой не представляющий). 
1.The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower. 
It was a flower with three petals, a flower of no account at all.
 
2."Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men (а где люди)?" the little prince asked, politely. 
The flower had once seen a caravan passing (цветок однажды видел проходящий мимо караван). 
"Men?" she echoed (люди – отозвался цветок). "I think there are six or seven of them in existence (думаю, шестеро или семеро их существует). I saw them, several years ago (видел их, несколько лет тому назад). But one never knows where to find them (но никто не знает, где их найти). The wind blows them away (ветер их унес). They have no roots (у них нет корней), and that makes their life very difficult (это усложняет им жизнь: досл. это делает их жизнь очень тяжелой)."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower. 
2."Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men?" the little prince asked, politely. 
The flower had once seen a caravan passing. 
"Men?" she echoed. "I think there are six or seven of them in existence. I saw them, several years ago. But one never knows where to find them. The wind blows them away. They have no roots, and that makes their life very difficult."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower.

Chapter 19
1. After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain (после этого маленький принц взобрался на высокую гору). The only mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees (единственными горами, ему известными, были три вулкана, которые доходили ему до колен). And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool (использовал потухший вулкан как скамеечку для ног). "From a mountain as high as this one (с такой высокой горы, как эта)," he said to himself (сказал себе), "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance (я смогу увидеть всю планету одним взглядом), and all the people..."
1. After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain. The only mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees. And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool. "From a mountain as high as this one," he said to himself, "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance, and all the people..."  
 
2. But he saw nothing (ничего не увидел), save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles (из-за горных вершин, острых, как иглы). 
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning - Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you (ты кто)?" said the little prince.
"Who are you - Who are you - Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone (будь моим другом, я так одинок)," he said.
"I am all alone - all alone - all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet (странная планета)!" he thought (подумал). 
"It is altogether dry (она и сухая), and altogether pointed (и остроконечная), and altogether harsh and forbidding (и суровая и пугающая одновременно). And the people have no imagination (и людей никакого воображения). They repeat whatever one says to them (они повторяют все, что им ни скажи)... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak (она всегда говорила первая)..." 
2. But he saw nothing, save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles. 
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning - Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you?" said the little prince.
"Who are you - Who are you - Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone," he said.
"I am all alone - all alone - all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet!" he thought. 
"It is altogether dry, and altogether pointed, and altogether harsh and forbidding. And the people have no imagination. They repeat whatever one says to them... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak..."

Chapter 20
1. But it happened (но случилось так) that after walking for a long time (после долгого хождения) through sand, and rocks, and snow (по песках, камнях, снегах: досл. сквозь пески…), the little prince at last (наконец) came upon a road (дорога). And all roads lead to the abodes (жилище) of men.
"Good morning," he said. 
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses (сад, весь в цветущих розах).
"Good morning," said the roses. 
The little prince gazed (пристально поглядел, «уставился») at them. They all looked like (похожи на) his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck (требовал, пораженный).
"We are roses," the roses said. 
And he was overcome with sadness (его одолела грусть). His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind (единственная такая) in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them (их было здесь пять тысяч), all alike (все одинаковые), in one single garden (в одном единственном саду)! 
1. But it happened that after walking for a long time through sand, and rocks, and snow, the little prince at last came upon a road. And all roads lead to the abodes of men.
"Good morning," he said. 
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses.
"Good morning," said the roses. 
The little prince gazed at them. They all looked like his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck.
"We are roses," the roses said. 
And he was overcome with sadness. His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them, all alike, in one single garden!
 
2. "She would be very much annoyed (она была бы очень раздосадована)," he said to himself, "if she should see that (увидь она это)... she would cough most dreadfully (кашляла бы еще ужаснее), and she would pretend that she was dying (притворялась бы, что умирает), to avoid being laughed at (чтобы избежать насмешки). And I should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life (а я притворялся бы, что ухаживаю за ней, спасая ее: досл. ухаживал бы ее назад к жизни) - for if I did not do that, to humble (смириться) myself also, she would really allow herself to die (позволит себе умереть)..." 
Then he went on with his reflections (продолжал размышлять): 
"I thought that I was rich (мне казалось, я богат), with a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose (все, что у меня было — это обычная роза). A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees (три вулкана, мне по колени)- and one of them perhaps (возможно) extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince (не такой уж я великий принц: досл. это не делает меня очень большим принцем)..." 
And he lay down in the grass and cried (лег на траву и заплакал). 
2. "She would be very much annoyed," he said to himself, "if she should see that... she would cough most dreadfully, and she would pretend that she was dying, to avoid being laughed at. And I should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life - for if I did not do that, to humble myself also, she would really allow herself to die..." 
Then he went on with his reflections: 
"I thought that I was rich, with a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose. A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees - and one of them perhaps extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince..." 
And he lay down in the grass and cried. 

Chapter 21
1. It was then that the fox appeared (потом появилась лиса: досл. это было потом, что лиса появилась).
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw nothing (несмотря на то, что никого вокруг не видел: досл. когда он оборачивался по кругу он видел ничего).
"I am right here (я прямо здесь)," the voice (голос) said, "under the apple tree (под яблоней)."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added (добавил), "You are very pretty to look at (ты хорошенький(ая): досл. ты очень миленький смотреть на)." 
1. It was then that the fox appeared.
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw nothing.
"I am right here," the voice said, "under the apple tree."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added, "You are very pretty to look at." 
 
2. "I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me (поиграй со мной: досл. подойди и поиграй со мной)," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy (несчастен)."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed (меня не приручили)."
"Ah! Please excuse me (извини)," said the little prince. 
But, after some thought (немного подумав: досл. после нескольких мыслей), he added:
"What does that mean (что это значит) - 'tame'?"
"You do not live here (ты здесь не живешь)," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for (что ты ищешь: досл. что это есть, что ты ищешь)?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns (ружья, пистолеты), and they hunt (охотятся). It is very disturbing (очень беспокоит). They also raise chickens (разводят цыплят). These are their only interests (это их единственное занятие (интерес)). Are you looking for chickens (ищешь цыплят)?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends (ищу друзей). What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected (это действие, которое часто игнорируют)," said the fox. It means to establish ties (установить связи)."
"'To establish ties'?"
"Just that (именно)," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more (для меня ты все еще ничего больше) than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys (как маленький мальчик, точно такой же, как и тысячи других). And I have no need of you (ты мне не нужен: досл. у меня неь необходимости тебя). And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other (мы будем друг другу нужны). To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand (начинаю понимать)," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things (на земле всякое бывает: досл. кто-то может увидеть всякие виды вещей)."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince. 
The fox seemed perplexed (озадаченной), and very curious (заинтересованной).
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters (охотники) on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect (ничто не совершенно)," sighed the fox.
2. "I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed."
"Ah! Please excuse me," said the little prince. 
But, after some thought, he added:
"What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"You do not live here," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns, and they hunt. It is very disturbing. They also raise chickens. These are their only interests. Are you looking for chickens?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends. What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected," said the fox. It means to establish ties."
"'To establish ties'?"
"Just that," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys. And I have no need of you. And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince. 
The fox seemed perplexed, and very curious.
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect," sighed the fox.  
 
3. But he came back to his idea (он вернулся к своей мысли). 
"My life is very monotonous (однообразна)," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike (все цыплята одинаковы), and all the men are just alike. And, in consequence (в результате), I am a little bored (мне немного скучно). But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun came to shine on my life (все равно, что солнце озарит мою жизнь: досл. солнце придет осветить). I shall know the sound of a step (буду знать звук шагов) that will be different from all the others (которые будут отличаться от всех остальных). Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground (будут заставлять меня прятаться: досл. отошлют меня спешить обратно под землю). Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow (твои же будут звучать для меня, как музыка за пределами моей норы). And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder (видишь хлебные поля вон там внизу)? I do not eat bread (хлеб). Wheat is of no use to me (мне пшеница не нужна: досл. от пшеницы мне никакой пользы). The wheat fields have nothing to say to me (ни о чем мне не говорят). And that is sad (печально). But you have hair that is the colour of gold (золотистые волосы). Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you (будет напоминать о тебе: досл. будет приносить меня назад к мыслям о тебе). And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat (я полюблю слушать ветер в пшенице)..." 
The fox gazed (пристально смотреть) at the little prince, for a long time. 
"Please - tame me!" he said.
"I want to (я хочу), very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time (у меня мало времени). I have friends to discover (найти друзей: досл. открыть друзей (как открыть новый остров)), and a great many things to understand (много понять)."
"One only understands the things that one tames (мы понимаем только то, что приручили)," said the fox. "Men have no more time to understand anything (у людей нет времени что-либо понимать). They buy things all ready made at the shops (покупают готовое в магазине). But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship (нет такого магазина, в котором можно купить дружбу), and so men have no friends any more (потому у людей больше нет друзей). If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient (терпеливый)," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little distance from me - like that - in the grass (сначала сядешь недалеко от меня — как сейчас — на траве). I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye (буду поглядывать: досл. смотреть уголками глаз), and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings (слова приводят к непониманию: досл. слова — источник непонимания). But you will sit a little closer (немного ближе) to me, every day..." 
The next day the little prince came back (вернулся). 
"It would have been better (было бы лучше) to come back at the same hour (возвращаться в одно и то же время)," said the fox. 
"If, for example (например), you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy (тогда в три часа я уже буду счастливым). I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances (буду счастливее и счастливее, когда будет приближаться время). At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying (уже буду волноваться) and jumping about («прыгать от нетерпения»). I shall show you how happy I am (покажу, как я счастлив)! But if you come at just any time (в разное время), I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you (в котором часу мое сердце будет готово приветствовать тебя)... One must observe the proper rites (нужно соблюдать должную церемонию)..."
"What is a rite (церемония)?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected (это тоже действие, которое часто игнорируется)," said the fox. "They are what make one day different from other days (то, что делает один день не таким, как другой), one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far as the vineyards (могу добраться до винного двора). But if the hunters danced at just any time (если будут танцевать в разное время), every day would be like every other day (каждый день будет такой, как и другие), and I should never have any vacation (отдых, каникулы) at all." 
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near (пришло время отбытия) - "Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry (заплачу)."
"It is your own fault (твоя собственная вина)," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of harm (я не желал тебе зла: досл. никогда не хотел какого-либо вида вреда); but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry (почти плачешь: досл. собираешься плакать)!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all (это не принесло тебе ничего хорошего)!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the colour of the wheat fields (хотя бы цвет пшеничного поля)." And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses (посмотри на розы). You will understand now that yours is unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret (секретный подарок)." 
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. 
"You are not at all like my rose (вы не такие, как моя роза)," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew him (как моя лиса, когда я ее впервые увидел). He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world." 
And the roses were very much embarrassed (смутились). 
"You are beautiful, but you are empty (пусты)," he went on. "One could not die for you (ради вас никто не умрет). To be sure, an ordinary passerby (обычный прохожий) would think that my rose looked just like you - the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone (сама по себе) she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered (ее я поливал); because it is she that I have put under the glass globe (ее помещал под стеклянный колпак); because it is she that I have sheltered behind the screen (прикрывал ширмой); because it is for her (для нее) that I have killed (уничтожил) the caterpillars (гусениц) (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies (за исключением двух или трех, которых мы сохранили, дабы они стали бабочками)); because it is she that I have listened to (ее я слушал), when she grumbled (ворчала), or boasted (хвасталась), or even sometimes when she said nothing (а иногда ничего не говорила). 
Because she is my rose.
3. But he came back to his idea. 
"My life is very monotonous," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike, and all the men are just alike. And, in consequence, I am a little bored. But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun came to shine on my life . I shall know the sound of a step that will be different from all the others. Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground. Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow. And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder? I do not eat bread. Wheat is of no use to me. The wheat fields have nothing to say to me. And that is sad. But you have hair that is the colour of gold. Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you. And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat..." 
The fox gazed at the little prince, for a long time. 
"Please - tame me!" he said.
"I want to, very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time. I have friends to discover, and a great many things to understand."
"One only understands the things that one tames," said the fox. "Men have no more time to understand anything. They buy things all ready made at the shops. But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship, and so men have no friends any more. If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little distance from me - like that - in the grass. I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye, and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings. But you will sit a little closer to me, every day..." 
The next day the little prince came back. 
"It would have been better to come back at the same hour," said the fox. 
"If, for example, you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy. I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances. At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying and jumping about. I shall show you how happy I am! But if you come at just any time, I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you... One must observe the proper rites..."
"What is a rite?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected," said the fox. "They are what make one day different from other days, one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far as the vineyards. But if the hunters danced at just any time, every day would be like every other day, and I should never have any vacation at all." 
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near - "Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry."
"It is your own fault," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of harm; but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the color of the wheat fields." And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses. You will understand now that yours is unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret." 
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. 
"You are not at all like my rose," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew him. He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world." 
And the roses were very much embarrassed. 
"You are beautiful, but you are empty," he went on. "One could not die for you. To be sure, an ordinary passerby would think that my rose looked just like you - the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered; because it is she that I have put under the glass globe; because it is she that I have sheltered behind the screen; because it is for her that I have killed the caterpillars (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies); because it is she that I have listened to, when she grumbled, or boasted, or even sometimes when she said nothing. 
Because she is my rose.  
 
And he went back to meet the fox.
"Goodbye," he said.
"Goodbye," said the fox. "And now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye."
"What is essential is invisible to the eye," the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. "It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so important."
"It is the time I have wasted for my rose - " said the little prince, so that he would be sure to remember.
"Men have forgotten this truth," said the fox. "But you must not forget it. You become responsible, forever, for what you have tamed. You are responsible for your rose..." 
"I am responsible for my rose," the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. 

Текст адаптирует Юлия Федорчук sono_io@inbox.ru 

Chapter 1
1. Once when I was six years old (когда-то, когда мне было шесть лет: досл. Я был шесть лет стар; «be – was, were – been» – быть) I saw a magnificent picture in a book (я видел замечательную картинку в книжке: «see – saw – seen» – видеть), called True Stories from Nature (называемой Правдивые Истории из Природы: «саll – called» – звать, называть, «from» – из), about the primeval forest (о древних лесах). It was a picture of a boa constrictor (это была картинка удава) in the act of swallowing an animal (глотающего животное: досл. в процессе глотания животного). Here is a copy of the drawing (это копия рисунка: досл. здесь есть копия; «here» – здесь).
 

1. Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing.
2. In the book it said (в книге говорилось: досл. это сказано; «say – said» – говорить): "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it (удавы глотают свою добычу целиком, не пережевывая: досл. без жевания её). After that they are not able to move (после этого они не в состоянии двигаться), and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion (и они спят в течение 6 месяцев, в которых они нуждаются для переваривания пищи: «through» – сквозь, «need» – нуждаться, сравни «to be in need of» – нуждаться в чем-то)." I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle (я задумался глубоко тогда над приключениями в джунглях: «ponder» – обдумывать). And after some work with a colored pencil (и поработав цветным каранлашем: досл. и после некоторой работы с цветным карандашем) I succeeded in making my first drawing (я нарисовал мой первый рисунок: досл. я преуспел в изготовлении; «make» – делать, «draw – drew – drawn» – рисовать, «drawing» – рисунок). My Drawing Number One (Номер Один). It looked like this (он выглядел так: досл. он выглядел, как это): 
 
2. In the book it said: "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it. After that they are not able to move, and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion." I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. And after some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing. My Drawing Number One. It looked like this:
3. I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups (я показал свое творение взрослым: «show – showed» – показывать), and asked them whether the drawing frightened them (и спросил у них, не пугает ли рисунок их). But they answered (ответили): "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat? (пугает? почему шляпа должна пугать: досл. почему должен кто-то один быть напуганным шляпой)". My drawing was not a picture of a hat (мой рисунок не был изображением шляпы). It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant (слон). But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it (но поскольку взрослые не были способны это понять: «since» – с тех пор), I made another drawing (я сделал другой рисунок): I drew the inside of the boa constrictor (удава изнутри: «inside» – то, что внутри), so that the grown-ups could see it clearly (так, чтобы взрослые могли видеть это ясно). They always need to have things explained (им всегда нужно объяснять: досл. они всегда нуждаются в том, чтобы вещи были объяснены; «explain – explained» – объяснять). My Drawing Number Two looked like this: 
 
3. I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the drawing frightened them. But they answered: "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat?" 
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant. But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it, I made another drawing: I drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the grown-ups could see it clearly. They always need to have things explained. My Drawing Number Two looked like this:
4. The grown-ups' response, this time (ответом взрослых на этот раз: досл. это время), was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors (был совет оставить мое рисование удавов: досл. было посоветовать мне отложить в сторону мое рисование удавов), whether from the inside or the outside (снаружи), and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar (и посвятить себя вместо этого географии, истории, арифметике и грамматике). That is why (вот почему), at the age of six (в возрасте 6 лет), I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter (я отказался от того, что могло бы быть замечательной карьерой художника: «give – gave – given» – давать, «give up» – отказываться). I had been disheartened by the failure (я огорчился провалом) of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves (сами), and it is tiresome for children (это (есть) утомительно для детей) to be always and forever explaining things to them (всегда и постоянно объяснять вещи для них: «always» – всегда, «forever» – навсегда). 
4. The grown-ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the outside, and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar. That is why, at the age of six, I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter. I had been disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves, and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
5. So then (поэтому) I chose another profession (я выбрал другую профессию: «choose – chose – chosen» – выбирать), and learned to pilot airplanes (и научился управлять самолётом: «learn – learned» – учиться). I have flown a little over all parts of the world (я летал понемногу над всеми частями мира: «a little» – немножко; «fly – flew – flown» – летать); and it is true (правда) that geography has been very useful to me (была очень полезна для меня: «useful» – полный полезности). At a glance (едва взглянув: «glance» – мимолётный взгляд) I can distinguish China from Arizona (я мог отличить Китай от Аризоны). If one gets lost in the night (если потеряешься ночью: досл. если один (кто-то) получит потерю ночью), such knowledge is valuable (такое знание очень ценно). 
In the course of this life (в течение моей жизни: «course» – направление, ход, курс) I have had a great many encounters with a great many people (я имел очень много встреч с очень многими людьми) who have been concerned with matters of consequence (которые заботились о последствиях). I have lived a great deal among grown-ups (я необычайно долго жил среди взрослых: «a great deal» – необычайно много). I have seen them intimately, close at hand (я видел их вблизи (близко), рядом под рукой). And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them (и это не улучшило моё мнение о них). 
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted (когда бы я не встречал одного из них, который казался мне в общем здравомыслящим: «at all» – в общем, «clear-sighted» – «чистовидящий»), I tried the experiment (я пробовал эксперимент) of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept (который всегда при мне: досл. который я всегда держал). I would try to find out (я пытался выяснить: «to find out» – выяснить), so, if this was a person of true understanding (была ли эта личность действительно понимающая: досл. личность правильного понимания). But, whoever it was (но кто бы это ни был), he, or she, would always say (он или она всегда говорили): "That is a hat (это шляпа)." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars (после этого я никогда не говорил с этим человеком об удавах, древних лесах, или звёздах). I would bring myself down to his level (я опускался до их уровня: досл. приносил себя вниз к их уровню). I would talk to him about bridge (бридж), and golf (гольф), and politics (политику), and neckties (галстуки). And the grown-up would be greatly pleased (очень довольны) to have met such a sensible man (что встретили такого понимающего человека: «meet – met» – встретить, «sensible» – чувствительный).
5. So then I chose another profession, and learned to pilot airplanes. I have flown a little over all parts of the world; and it is true that geography has been very useful to me. At a glance I can distinguish China from Arizona. If one gets lost in the night, such knowledge is valuable. 
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a great many people who have been concerned with matters of consequence. I have lived a great deal among grown-ups. I have seen them intimately, close at hand. And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them. 
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted, I tried the experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept. I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true understanding. But, whoever it was, he, or she, would always say: "That is a hat." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars. I would bring myself down to his level. I would talk to him about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties. And the grown-up would be greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man. 
 
Chapter 2
1. So I lived my life alone (так я и жил мою жизнь один: «live – lived» – жить), without anyone that I could really talk to (без кого-то, с кем я действительно мог поговорить: «can – could» – мочь, «talked to» – говорить с кем-то), until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago (пока не потерпел крушение в Сахаре, шесть лет назад: досл. пока не имел аварию с моим самолётом в Пустыне Сахара). Something  was broken in my engine (что-то поломалось в моём двигателе: «brake – broke – broken» – биться, ломаться, «some + thing» – какая-то вещь = что-то). And as (поскольку) I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers (ни механика, ни пассажиров: «neither… nor» – ни… ни), I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone (я взялся за ремонт сам: досл. я взял себя попытаться (устранить) тяжёлый ремонт весь (совсем) один; «set to» – взяться (за работу)). It was a question of life or death (вопрос жизни и смерти) for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week (я имел едва ли достаточно питьевой воды до конца недели). 
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand (первую ночь, тогда, я пошёл спать на песке), a thousand miles from any human habitation (за тысячу миль от какого-либо человеческого поселения: «to habituate» – обитать). I was more isolated (я был более изолирован) than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean (чем потерпевший крушение моряк на плоту посреди океана: «shipwrecked» = «ship»+«wrecked»= «корабль»+ «повреждённый», «raft» – плот). Thus (поэтому) you can imagine (представить) my amazement (изумление), at sunrise (на заре: «sunrise»= «sun»+ «rise» = «солнце»+ «вставать, подниматься»), when I was awakened by an odd little voice (когда я был разбужен странным голоском: «little voice» – маленький голос). It said (сказал):
"If you please - draw me a sheep! (будь так добр – нарисуй мне ягнёнка)"
"What! (Что?)"
"Draw me a sheep!" 
I jumped to my feet (я вскочил: досл. прыгнул на мои ноги), completely thunderstruck (совершенно ошарашенный: «thunderstruck» = «thunder»+ «struck» – «молния» + «удар»). I blinked my eyes hard (усиленно замигал: досл. я мигал моими глазами тяжело). I looked carefully all around me (тщательно огляделся: досл. смотрел кругом меня). And I saw a most extraordinary small person (и я увидел чрезвычайно необычного человечка: досл. маленькую персону), who stood there examining me (стоял изучая меня) with great seriousness (серьёзностью). Here you may see (вы можете видеть) the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him (который я позже смог нарисовать с него). But my drawing is certainly (конечно) very much less charming (намного меньше элегантный) than its model. 
 

1. So I lived my life alone, without anyone that I could really talk to, until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago. Something was broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers, I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone. It was a question of life or death for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week. 
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a thousand miles from any human habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement, at sunrise, when I was awakened by an odd little voice. It said:
"If you please - draw me a sheep!"
"What!"
"Draw me a sheep!" 
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I looked carefully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small person, who stood there examining me with great seriousness. Here you may see the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him. But my drawing is certainly very much less charming than its model. 
2. That, however, is not my fault (это, все же, не моя вина). The grown-ups discouraged (здесь: разуверили) me in my painter's career (карьере художника) when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything (и никогда не учился рисовать что-либо), except (кроме) boas from the outside and boas from the inside. 
Now I stared (пристально смотрел) at this sudden apparition (внезапное видение) with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment (с глазами на выкате от удивления: досл. с глазами прямо начинающими из моей головы). Remember (помните), I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region (я разбился в пустыне, за тысячи миль от какого-либо заселённого региона). And yet (и все же) my little man seemed (казался) neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands (ни блуждающим неуверенно среди песков), nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear (ни теряющим сознание от усталости или голода или жажды или страха). Nothing about him (ничто в нём: досл. о нём) gave any suggestion (давало какие-либо подозрения) of a child lost (ребёнок потерялся) in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last (когда наконец-то) I was able to speak (говорить), I said to him (ему): 
"But – what are you doing here? (но – что ты здесь делаешь)" 
And in answer he repeated (в ответ он повторил: «repeat – repeated» – повторять), very slowly (медленно), as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence (так как если бы он говорил о деле большой важности): 
"If you please – draw me a sheep..." 
When a mystery (загадка, тайна) is too overpowering (пересиливающая, подавляющая), one dare not disobey (никто не посмеет не подчиниться: досл. один (кто-то) не посмеет). Absurd as it might seem to me (глупо, как это могло мне казаться), a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death (в опасности смерти), I took out (вынул) of my pocket (карман) a sheet of paper (лист бумаги) and my fountain-pen (авторучку). But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated (как мои занятия были сосредоточены) on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (пареньку: досл. маленькому парню, «chap» – трещина, но разг. «парень») (a little crossly (сердитый), too) that I did not know how to draw (как рисовать). He answered me: "That doesn't matter (это неважно). Draw me a sheep..." 
But I had never (никогда) drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures (одну из двух) I had drawn so often (так часто). It was that (это была та) of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded (поражён) to hear the little fellow (парень) greet it with (приветствовал её с),
"No, no, no! I do not want (я не хочу) an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature (очень опасное создание), and an elephant is very cumbersome (громоздкий). Where I live (где я живу), everything (все: «everything» = «every» + «thing»= «все»+ «вещь») is very small. What I need is a sheep (что мне нужно, так это ягнёнок: досл. что мне нужно есть ягнёнок). Draw me a sheep." 
So then I made a drawing (и вот я нарисовал: досл. сделал рисунок). 
2. That, however, is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged me in my painter's career when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything, except boas from the outside and boas from the inside. 
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment. Remember, I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands, nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear. Nothing about him gave any suggestion of a child lost in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last I was able to speak, I said to him: 
"But - what are you doing here?" 
And in answer he repeated, very slowly, as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence: 
"If you please -- draw me a sheep..." 
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. Absurd as it might seem to me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death, I took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and my fountain-pen. But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (a little crossly, too) that I did not know how to draw. He answered me: "That doesn't matter. Draw me a sheep..." 
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures I had drawn so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded to hear the little fellow greet it with,
"No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature, and an elephant is very cumbersome. Where I live, everything is very small. What I need is a sheep. Draw me a sheep." 
So then I made a drawing. 
 
3. He looked at it carefully (посмотрел пристально), then he said:
"No. This sheep is already (уже) very sickly (болезненный). Make me another (другой)." 
So I made another drawing. 

3. He looked at it carefully, then he said:
"No. This sheep is already very sickly. Make me another." 
So I made another drawing.
 
4. My friend smiled gently and indulgently (мой друг улыбнулся мягко и неопределённо).
"You see yourself, (ты видишь сам)" he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram (баран). It has horns (у него рога)." 
So then I did my drawing over once more (ещё раз). 

4. My friend smiled gently and indulgently.
"You see yourself," he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram. It has horns." 
So then I did my drawing over once more. 

 
4. But it was rejected (отвергнут) too, just like the others (точно так же, как и другие). 
"This one is too old (этот слишком стар). I want a sheep that will live a long time (будет жить долгое время)." 
By this time (на этот раз: досл. тем временем) my patience was exhausted (моё терпение истощилось), because I was in a hurry (спешил: досл. был в спешке) to start taking my engine apart (демонтировать двигатель). So I tossed off («toss» – «подбрасывать») this drawing. And I threw out an explanation with it (и выбросил объяснение с ним). 
"This is only his box (только его коробка). The sheep you asked for is inside (ягнёнок, о котором ты просил, внутри: «to ask for» – «просить о чем-либо»)."

4. But it was rejected too, just like the others. 
"This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a long time." 
By this time my patience was exhausted, because I was in a hurry to start taking my engine apart. So I tossed off this drawing. And I threw out an explanation with it. 
"This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is inside." 
 
 
5. I was very surprised (удивлён) to see a light break over the face (как свет озарил лицо: досл. свет пробился на лицо) of my young judge (юного судьи): 
"That is exactly the way I wanted it (он именно такой, как я хотел: досл. это точно такой путь, как я его хотел)! Do you think (думаешь) that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass (этому ягнёнку нужно будет большое количество травы)?"
"Why (почему)?" 
"Because where I live everything is very small... (потому что, где я живу, всё очень маленькое)" 
"There (там) will surely (наверняка) be enough (достаточно) grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you (я нарисовал очень маленького ягнёнка: досл. это очень маленький ягнёнок, что я дал тебе)." 
He bent (наклонил) his head (голову) over the drawing:
"Not so small that – Look (не такой уж и маленький – посмотри)! He has gone to sleep... (он ушёл спать)"
And that is how (и вот так) I made the acquaintance (познакомился: досл. сделал знакомство) of the little prince. 
5. I was very surprised to see a light break over the face of my young judge: 
"That is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass?"
"Why?" 
"Because where I live everything is very small..." 
"There will surely be enough grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you." 
He bent his head over the drawing:
"Not so small that - Look! He has gone to sleep..."
And that is how I made the acquaintance of the little prince.

Chapter 3
1. It took me a long time (забрало у меня много времени) to learn where he came from (откуда он). The little prince, who asked me so many questions (который много спрашивал: досл. спрашивал много вопросов), never seemed to hear (никогда казалось слышал: в отличие о русского, в английском нет двойного возражения, сравни: он никогда не слышал) the ones I asked him (те, которые задавал я: «ones» – означает «questions», оно заменяет их в предложении, дабы не было тавтологии). It was from words dropped by chance that (это было со слов, брошенных случайно: «to drop – dropped» – падать, бросать, капля; «by chance» – «случайно»), little by little (понемножку), everything was revealed to me (всё было обнаружено мне: «reveal – revealed» – «обнаруживать»).
The first time (когда впервые: досл. первое время) he saw my airplane (самолёт), for instance (например) (I shall not draw (не буду рисовать) my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me (это было бы слишком сложно для меня)), he asked me:
"What is that object (объект, штуковина)?"
"That is not an object. It flies (он летает). It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly (и я гордился тем, что могу его научить, что я могу летать: «to be proud» – гордиться, быть гордым). He cried out (выкрикнул, воскликнул), then (тогда):
"What (как)! You dropped down from the sky (ты упал с небес: досл. упал вниз)?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly (ответил скромно: «modest» – скромный).
"Oh! That is funny! (как забавно: досл. это есть забавно)"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter (рассмеялся: досл. разбился в чудный (красивый) раскат смеха), which irritated (разозлил: «to irritate – irritated» – злить, раздражать) me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously (мне нравится, когда к моим несчастьям относятся серьёзно: досл. мои несчастья берутся серьёзно: «misfortune» – отсутствие счастья).
Then he added (добавил: «to add – added» – добавить, дополнить):
"So you, too, come from the sky (так ты тоже пришёл с неба)! Which is your planet? (с какой планеты: досл. которая есть твоя планета)"
At that moment (в тот момент) I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence (пролился свет на непостижимую тайну его присутствия: досл. я поймал проблеск света в непроницаемой тайне); and I demanded (потребовал: «to demand – demanded» – требовать), abruptly (резко):
"Do you come from another planet (другой планеты)?"
But he did not reply (но он не ответил). He tossed (наклонил) his head gently (мягко, осторожно), without taking his eyes from my plane (не отрывая глаз от моего самолёта: досл. без «забирания» его глаз):
"It is true (действительно: досл. это есть правда) that on that you can't have come from very far away... (что на этом ты не мог прийти из далека)"
And he sank into a reverie (задумался: досл. погрузился в мечтательность), which lasted a long time (которая продолжалась долгое время). Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket (вытянув моего ягнёнка из его (т. е. своего) кармана), he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure (он погрузился в созерцание своего сокровища: досл. спрятал, закопал себя в созерцание).
You can imagine (вы можете представить) how my curiosity was aroused (любопытство возросло) by this half-confidence about the "other planets"(этим полупризнанием о «других планетах»). I made a great effort (я попытался: досл. сделал большое усилие), therefore (следовательно), to find out more on this subject (узнать побольше по этому поводу: «to find out» – узнать, выяснить). "My little man, where do you come from (откуда ты: досл. откуда ты пришёл)? What is this 'where I live,' (что это за «где я живу») of which you speak (о котором ты говоришь)? Where do you want to take your sheep (куда ты хочешь забрать своего ягнёнка)?"
After a reflective silence (гулкой тишины: досл. отражающей тишины) he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me (что хорошо в коробке, которую ты мне дал: досл. вещь, которая так хороша, о коробке, которую ты дал мне) is that at night he can use it as his house (так это то, что ночью он сможет использовать её как свой дом)."
"That is so (это так). And if you are good (если ты добрый) I will give you a string (я дам тебе тесьму (верёвку)), too, so that you can tie him during the day (сможешь привязывать его на протяжение дня: «to tie – tied» – связывать), and a post (здесь: колышек, но имеет также  значения «сообщение», «посылать») to tie him to (к которому его привязать)."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer (казалось был шокирован этим предложением):
"Tie him (привязывать его)! What a queer idea (что за странная идея)!"
"But if you don't tie him (если ты его не привяжешь)," I said, "he will wander off somewhere (зайдёт куда-то: «to wander – wandered» – бродить), and get lost (потеряется: досл. получит потерю)."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter (ещё раз рассмеялся):
"But where do you think he would go? (но куда, по твоему мнению, он мог бы пойти)"
"Anywhere (куда угодно: «anywhere»= «any+where» = «любой»+ «где»). Straight ahead of him (прямо перед собой)."
Then the little prince said, earnestly (серьёзно):
"That doesn't matter (это неважно). Where I live, everything is so small (где я живу, всё очень маленькое)!
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness (немножко печально: досл. с возможно намёком на печаль), he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far... (идя прямо, никто не зайдёт далеко)"

1. It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince, who asked me so many questions, never seemed to hear the ones I asked him. It was from words dropped by chance that, little by little, everything was revealed to me.
The first time he saw my airplane, for instance (I shall not draw my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me), he asked me:
"What is that object?"
"That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly. He cried out, then:
"What! You dropped down from the sky?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly.
"Oh! That is funny!"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter, which irritated me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously.
Then he added:
"So you, too, come from the sky! Which is your planet?"
At that moment I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence; and I demanded, abruptly:
"Do you come from another planet?"
But he did not reply. He tossed his head gently, without taking his eyes from my plane:
"It is true that on that you can't have come from very far away..."
And he sank into a reverie, which lasted a long time. Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket, he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure.
You can imagine how my curiosity was aroused by this half-confidence about the "other planets." I made a great effort, therefore, to find out more on this subject. "My little man, where do you come from? What is this 'where I live,' of which you speak? Where do you want to take your sheep?"
After a reflective silence he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me is that at night he can use it as his house."
"That is so. And if you are good I will give you a string, too, so that you can tie him during the day, and a post to tie him to."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer:
"Tie him! What a queer idea!"
"But if you don't tie him," I said, "he will wander off somewhere, and get lost."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter:
"But where do you think he would go?"
"Anywhere. Straight ahead of him."
Then the little prince said, earnestly:
"That doesn't matter. Where I live, everything is so small!
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness, he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far..." 
 
 

Chapter 4
1. I had thus (таким образом) learned a second (второй) fact of great importance (факт большой важности): this was that (это было то) the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house (едва ли больше за дом)! 
But that did not really (вправду) surprise (удивило) me much. I knew very well (знал очень хорошо: «to know – knew» – знать) that in addition (в дополнение) to the great (больших) planets – such as (таких как) the Earth (Земля), Jupiter, Mars, Venus (Венера) – to which we have given names (которым были даны имена), there are (есть: досл. там есть) also hundreds of others (также сотни других), some of which (некоторые из которых) are so small that one has a hard time seeing them (что их тяжело увидеть: досл. один имеет тяжёлое время видя их) through (сквозь, через) the telescope. When an astronomer discovers (когда астрономы открывают: «to discover» – открывать в значении «делать открытие») one of these (одну из них) he does not give it a name, but only a number (но только номер). He might call it (он может назвать её), for example (для примера), "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason (у меня были серьёзные основания) to believe (верить) that the planet from which the little prince came (из которой пришёл маленький принц) is the asteroid known as (известный как) B-61. 
This asteroid has only once been seen (только раз был увиден) through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer (это был турецкий астроном), in 1909. 
1. I had thus learned a second fact of great importance: this was that the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house! 
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in addition to the great planets –such as the Earth, Jupiter, Mars, Venus – to which we have given names, there are also hundreds of others, some of which are so small that one has a hard time seeing them through the telescope. When an astronomer discovers one of these he does not give it a name, but only a number. He might call it, for example, "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason to believe that the planet from which the little prince came is the asteroid known as B-61. 
This asteroid has only once been seen through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer, in 1909.
 
2. On making his discovery (сделав открытие), the astronomer had presented it (представил его) to the International Astronomical Congress (Международному Астрономическому Конгрессу), in a great demonstration (с особой пышностью: досл. в большой демонстрации). But he was in Turkish costume (в турецком костюме), and so nobody would believe (никто не поверил) what he said (что он говорил). 
2. On making his discovery, the astronomer had presented it to the International Astronomical Congress, in a great demonstration. But he was in Turkish costume, and so nobody would believe what he said.
 
3. Grown-ups are like that (взрослые – они такие: досл. взрослые похожи на то)...
Fortunately (к счастью), however (тем не менее), for the reputation (для репутации) of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator made a law (сделал закон) that his subjects (подданные), under pain of death (под страхом смертной казни: досл. под болью смерти), should change to European costume (должны сменить одежду на европейский костюм).
3. Grown-ups are like that...
Fortunately, however, for the reputation of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator made a law that his subjects, under pain of death, should change to European costume.
 
4. So in 1920 the astronomer gave (дал: досл. «to give – gave – given» – давать) his demonstration all over again (опять), dressed with impressive style and elegance (одет впечатляюще стильно и элегантно: досл. одет с впечатляющим стилем и элегантностью). And this time everybody accepted his report (приняли его доклад: «to accept – accepted» – принимать). 
If I have told you these details (если я рассказал вам эти детали) about the asteroid, and made a note of its number for you (и указал номер: досл. сделал замечание его номера для вас), it is on account (на счёт) of the grown-ups and their ways (взглядов: досл. дорог, путей). When you tell them (когда ты говоришь им) that you have made a new friend (что у тебя новый друг: досл. ты сделал нового друга), they never ask you (никогда не спросят) any questions about essential matters (по сути: досл. о существенных делах). They never say (никогда не скажут) to you, "What does his voice sound like (какой у него голос: досл. на что похоже звучит)? What games does he love best (какие игры он любит большего всего: «the best» – наилучший)? Does he collect butterflies (коллекционирует бабочек)?" Instead (взамен), they demand (требуют): "How old is he (сколько лет ему)? How many brothers has he (сколько братьев он имеет)? How much does he weigh (весит)? How much money does his father make (сколько денег зарабатывает его отец: досл. как много денег делает)?" Only from these figures (только по этим чертам, цифрам) do they think they have learned anything (что-либо) about him. 
If you were to say to the grown-ups (если бы вы сказали взрослым): "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick (из розового кирпича), with geraniums in the windows (геранью на окне) and doves on the roof (голубами на крыше)," they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all (они не в состоянии будут представить его вообще: досл. они не будут способны поймать идею этого дома в целом). You would have to say to them (вам нужно сказать им): "I saw a house that cost (стоит) $ 20,000." Then they would exclaim (они воскликнули бы):
"Oh, what a pretty (милый) house that is!" 
Just so (точно так же), you might (могли) say to them: 
"The proof (доказательство) that the little prince existed (существует: «to exist – existed» – существовать) is that he was charming (очарователен), that he laughed (смеялся), and that he was looking for a sheep (разыскивал ягнёнка: вообще-то «ягнёнок» – «lamb», а «sheep» – овца). If anybody wants a sheep (если кто-то хочет ягнёнка), that is a proof that he exists (это доказательство того, что он существует)."
And what good would it do to tell them that (и что толку было бы им это говорить: досл. что хорошего это сделало бы сказать им это)? They would shrug their shoulders (пожали бы плечами), and treat you like a child (воспримут тебя как ребёнка). But if you said to them: 
"The planet he came from (пришёл с) is Asteroid B-612," then they would be convinced (были бы убеждены), and leave you in peace from their questions (и перестали бы задавать вопросы: досл. оставили бы вас в спокойствии от их вопросов). 
They are like that (они такие). One must not hold it against them (не надо против них выступать: досл. один не должен держать это против них). Children should always show great forbearance toward (детям должно всегда проявлять огромную терпимость к) grown-up people (взрослые люди). 
But certainly (но конечно же), for us who understand life (для нас, понимающих жизнь: досл. для нас, кто понимает жизнь), figures are a matter of indifference (цифры не имеют значения: досл. цифры есть дело безразличия). I should have liked to begin (я хотел бы начать) this story (историю) in the fashion of the fairy-tales (в стиле сказки). I should have like to say (хотел бы сказать): "Once upon a time (как-то давным-давно) there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself (едва ли больше него самого), and who had need of a sheep... (которому нужен был ягнёнок)" 
To those (для тех) who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth (звучало бы правдоподобнее: досл. это дало бы больше воздуха правды) to my story. 
For I do not want any one (кто-то, любой) to read my book carelessly (беззаботно). I have suffered too much grief (мне было тяжело: досл. я страдал слишком много скорби) in setting down these memories (упорядочить воспоминания). Six years have already passed (6 лет уже прошло) since my friend went away from me (с тех пор, как мой друг покинул меня: досл. ушёл о меня), with his sheep. If I try to describe him here (если я пытаюсь его описать здесь), it is to make sure that I shall not forget him (чтобы быть уверенным, что я его не забуду). To forget a friend is sad (забывать друга – печально: «to forget – forgot» – забывать). Not every one has had a friend (не у каждого был друг). And if I forget him, I may become (могу стать) like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything (которые больше не заинтересованы ничем: «to be interested in anything» – быть заинтересованным в чём-либо) but figures... 
It is for that purpose (для этой цели), again (опять же), that I have bought (купил: «to buy – bought» – купить) a box of paints (коробку красок) and some pencils (карандаши). It is hard (тяжело) to take up (приниматься) drawing again at my age (в моём возрасте), when I have never made (никогда не делал) any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try (я конечно попытаюсь) to make my portraits as true to life as possible (по возможности нарисовать похожие портреты: досл. сделать портреты такими правдивыми к жизни как возможно). But I am not at all sure of success (но я в общем не уверен в успехе). One drawing goes along all right (получается совсем правильным), and another has no resemblance to its subject (другой не имеет схожести к его предмету). I make some errors (делаю некоторые ошибки), too, in the little prince's height (рост маленького принца): in one place (в одном месте) he is too tall (слишком высок) and in another too short (короток). And I feel some doubts (чувствую некоторые сомнения) about the color of his costume. So I fumble (нащупывать) along as best I can (хорошо, как только мог), now (сейчас) good, now bad, and I hope (надеюсь) generally fair-to-middling (в общем так себе). 
In certain more important details (в некоторых более важных деталях) I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something that will not be my fault (вина). My friend never explained anything to me (никогда ничего не объяснял). He thought (думал), perhaps (возможно), that I was like himself (что я такой, как он). But I, alas (увы), do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes (не знаю, как увидеть ягнёнка сквозь стены коробки). Perhaps I am a little like (немного похож) the grown-ups. I have had to grow old (я повзрослел). 
4. So in 1920 the astronomer gave his demonstration all over again, dressed with impressive style and elegance. And this time everybody accepted his report. 
If I have told you these details about the asteroid, and made a note of its number for you, it is on account of the grown-ups and their ways. When you tell them that you have made a new friend, they never ask you any questions about essential matters. They never say to you, "What does his voice sound like? What games does he love best? Does he collect butterflies?" Instead, they demand: "How old is he? How many brothers has he? How much does he weigh? How much money does his father make?" Only from these figures do they think they have learned anything about him. 
If you were to say to the grown-ups: "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick, with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof," they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all. You would have to say to them: "I saw a house that cost $ 20,000." Then they would exclaim:
"Oh, what a pretty house that is!" 
Just so, you might say to them: 
"The proof that the little prince existed is that he was charming, that he laughed, and that he was looking for a sheep. If anybody wants a sheep, that is a proof that he exists."
And what good would it do to tell them that? They would shrug their shoulders, and treat you like a child. But if you said to them: 
"The planet he came from is Asteroid B-612," then they would be convinced, and leave you in peace from their questions. 
They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should always show great forbearance toward grown-up people. 
But certainly, for us who understand life, figures are a matter of indifference. I should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of the fairy-tales. I should have like to say: "Once upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself, and who had need of a sheep..." 
To those who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth to my story. 
For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered too much grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already passed since my friend went away from me, with his sheep. If I try to describe him here, it is to make sure that I shall not forget him. To forget a friend is sad. Not every one has had a friend. And if I forget him, I may become like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything but figures... 
It is for that purpose, again, that I have bought a box of paints and some pencils. It is hard to take up drawing again at my age, when I have never made any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try to make my portraits as true to life as possible. But I am not at all sure of success. One drawing goes along all right, and another has no resemblance to its subject. I make some errors, too, in the little prince's height: in one place he is too tall and in another too short. And I feel some doubts about the color of his costume. So I fumble along as best I can, now good, now bad, and I hope generally fair-to-middling. 
In certain more important details I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something that will not be my fault. My friend never explained anything to me. He thought, perhaps, that I was like himself. But I, alas, do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes. Perhaps I am a little like the grown-ups. I have had to grow old.

	
Chapter 5
1. As each day passed (как проходил каждый день) I would learn (изучал), in our talk (как я говорил: досл. в нашем разговоре), something (что-то) about the little prince's planet, his departure (отъезд) from it, his journey (путешествие). The information would come very slowly (поступала очень медленно), as it might chance (могло случиться) to fall from his thoughts (выпасть из его мыслей). It was in this way (это было в этом пути) that I heard (услышал: «to hear – heard» – слышать), on the third (третий) day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs (катастрофа с баобабом). 
This time, once more (ещё раз: досл. раз больше), I had the sheep to thank for it (я должен благодарить ягнёнка за это: досл. я имел ягнёнка поблагодарить за это). For the little prince asked (спросил) me abruptly (резко) - as if seized by a grave doubt (так будто выхвачено серьёзными сомнениями) – "It is true, isn't it (не правда ли: досл. не есть это), that sheep eat little bushes (ягнёнок ест маленькие кустарников)?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad (я доволен)!"
I did not understand (я не понимал) why it was so important (почему это так важно) that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added (добавил):
"Then it follows (это следует) that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out (отметил) to the little prince that baobabs were not (не есть) little bushes, but, on the contrary (напротив), trees as big as castles (деревья такие же большие, как замок); and that even if (даже если) he took a whole herd (стадо) of elephants away with him (туда с собой), the herd would not eat up one single baobab (ни одного баобаба: досл. один единственный баобаб). 
The idea of the herd of elephants (идея о стаде слонов) made the little prince laugh (заставила принца смеяться: досл. сделала маленького принца смеющимся).
"We would have to put them one on top of the other (нам придётся поставить из друг на друга: досл. одного на верхушку другого)," he said.
1. As each day passed I would learn, in our talk, something about the little prince's planet, his departure from it, his journey. The information would come very slowly, as it might chance to fall from his thoughts. It was in this way that I heard, on the third day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs. 
This time, once more, I had the sheep to thank for it. For the little prince asked me abruptly - as if seized by a grave doubt-- "It is true, isn't it, that sheep eat little bushes?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad!"
I did not understand why it was so important that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added:
"Then it follows that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out to the little prince that baobabs were not little bushes, but, on the contrary, trees as big as castles; and that even if he took a whole herd of elephants away with him, the herd would not eat up one single baobab. 
The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh.
"We would have to put them one on top of the other," he said.  
 
2. But he made a wise comment (мудрое пояснение):
"Before they grow so big (перед тем, как они выросли такими большими), the baobabs start out by being little (они были маленькими: досл. баобабы начали с быть маленькими)."
"That is strictly correct (очень правильно: досл. строго правильно)," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs (почему ты хочешь, чтобы ягнёнок ел маленькие баобабы)?"
He answered me at once (сразу же), "Oh, come, come! (ладно, ладно)", as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident (так как если бы он говорил о чём-то, что было очевидно). And I was obliged (был обязан) to make a great mental effort (сделать огромное умственное усилие) to solve (развязать) this problem, without any assistance (без какого-либо участия).
Indeed (на самом деле), as I learned (как я узнал), there were on the planet (было на планете) where the little prince lived – as on all (как и на всех) planets – good plants (растения) and bad plants. In consequence (в следствие), there were good seeds (семена) from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible (невидимые). They sleep deep (спят глубоко) in the heart of the earth's darkness (в сердце земной темноты), until some one among them (кто-то среди них) is seized with the desire to awaken (поднимается с желанием проснуться). Then this little seed will stretch itself (делают усилия) and begin (начинают) – timidly at first (робко с начала) – to push a charming little sprig (давать очаровательный маленький росток: досл. толкать росток) inoffensively upward toward the sun (безобидно вверх к солнцу). If it is only a sprout of radish (росток редиса) or the sprig of a rose-bush (побег куста роз), one would let it grow wherever it might wish (можно позволить им расти где угодно). But when it is a bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible (нужно уничтожить его настолько быстро, насколько возможно), the very first instant that one recognizes it (в первое мгновение, как узнали его). 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet (сейчас были на планете ужасные семена на планете) that was the home (была домом) of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil (почва) of that planet was infested (наводнены) with them. A baobab is something you will never (баобаб – это такое, от чего вы никогда), never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late (никогда не сможете отделаться, если заметите слишком поздно: «to get rid of» – отделаться от кого-то или чего-то). It spreads (распространяется) over the entire (всей) planet. It bores clear through it with its roots (он пронизывает её всю своими корнями). And if the planet is too small (слишком мала), and the baobabs are too many (слишком много), they split it in pieces (разделят её на части)... 
2. But he made a wise comment:
"Before they grow so big, the baobabs start out by being little."
"That is strictly correct," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs?"
He answered me at once, "Oh, come, come!", as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident. And I was obliged to make a great mental effort to solve this problem, without any assistance.
Indeed, as I learned, there were on the planet where the little prince lived-- as on all planets-- good plants and bad plants. In consequence, there were good seeds from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible. They sleep deep in the heart of the earth's darkness, until some one among them is seized with the desire to awaken. Then this little seed will stretch itself and begin-- timidly at first-- to push a charming little sprig inoffensively upward toward the sun. If it is only a sprout of radish or the sprig of a rose-bush, one would let it grow wherever it might wish. But when it is a bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible, the very first instant that one recognizes it. 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet that was the home of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil of that planet was infested with them. A baobab is something you will never, never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late. It spreads over the entire planet. It bores clear through it with its roots. And if the planet is too small, and the baobabs are too many, they split it in pieces...
 
3. "It is a question of discipline (это вопрос дисциплины)," the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning (когда ты закончил утренние процедуры), then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet (тогда время привести в порядок твою планету), just so (точно так же), with the greatest care (с наибольшей заботой). You must see to it (ты должен следить) that you pull up regularly (вытянуть постоянно) all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be distinguished (с первого момента, когда их можно отличить) from the rosebushes which they resemble (которые они напоминают) so closely in their earliest youth (так близко в их наиболее ранней юности). It is very tedious (скучный) work," the little prince added, "but very easy (лёгкий)." 
3. "It is a question of discipline," the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning, then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet, just so, with the greatest care. You must see to it that you pull up regularly all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be distinguished from the rosebushes which they resemble so closely in their earliest youth. It is very tedious work," the little prince added, "but very easy."
 
4. And one day (однажды: досл. один день) he said to me: "You ought to make (должен сделать) a beautiful drawing, so that (чтобы) the children where you live (там, где ты живёшь) can see exactly how all this is (точно видели, как всё это есть). That would be very useful to them (это было бы очень полезно для них) if they were to travel some day (если им придётся путешествовать когда-то). Sometimes (иногда)," he added, "there is no harm (это не вред) in putting off a piece of work until another day (отложить часть работы на другой день). But when it is a matter of baobabs (но если дело касается баобабов), that always means a catastrophe (это всегда означает катастрофу). I knew a planet that was inhabited (была заселена) by a lazy man (ленивым человеком). He neglected (проигнорировал) three little bushes..." 
So, as the little prince described it to me (как маленький принц описал мне это), I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like (мне не очень нравится) to take the tone of a moralist (держать тон поучения). But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood (опасность баобабов так мало понимаема), and such considerable risks would be run by anyone (это угрожает любому: досл. и такой значительный риск может бежать кем угодно) who might get lost (потеряться) on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through my reserve (нарушу своё правило: досл. прорвусь сквозь). "Children (дети)," I say plainly (просто), "watch out for the baobabs (присматривайте за баобабами)!" 
My friends, like myself (мои друзья, как и я сам), have been skirting this danger for a long time (были окружены этой опасностью долгое время: «skirted» – окруженный и «skirt» – юбка), without ever knowing it (даже без знания этого); and so it is for them (это для них) that I have worked so hard over (я работал так тяжело над) this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means (урок, который был преподан мне в этом смысле: «pass» – передавать, проходить) is worth all the trouble it has cost me (стоит всех тех хлопот, которые он мне стоил: «to be worth» – стоить чего-либо). 
Perhaps (возможно) you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book (почему нет других рисунков в этой книге) as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs? (таких же чудесных и впечатляющих, как рисунок баобаба)" 
The reply is simple (ответ прост). I have tried (я пытался). But with the others I have not been successful (но с другими я не преуспел). When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity (я вдохновлялся срочной необходимостью: досл. я был несом передо мной  вдохновляющей силой срочной необходимости). 
4. And one day he said to me: "You ought to make a beautiful drawing, so that the children where you live can see exactly how all this is. That would be very useful to them if they were to travel some day. Sometimes," he added, "there is no harm in putting off a piece of work until another day. But when it is a matter of baobabs, that always means a catastrophe. I knew a planet that was inhabited by a lazy man. He neglected three little bushes..." 
So, as the little prince described it to me, I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like to take the tone of a moralist. But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood, and such considerable risks would be run by anyone who might get lost on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through my reserve. "Children," I say plainly, "watch out for the baobabs!" 
My friends, like myself, have been skirting this danger for a long time, without ever knowing it; and so it is for them that I have worked so hard over this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means is worth all the trouble it has cost me. 
Perhaps you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs?" 
The reply is simple. I have tried. But with the others I have not been successful. When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity.

Chapter 6
1. Oh, little prince! Bit by bit (понемногу) I came to understand (я пришёл к пониманию) the secrets of your sad little life (секретов твоей грустной маленькой жизни)... For a long time (длительное время) you had found your only entertainment (ты находил своё единственное развлечение) in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset (в тихом удовольствии созерцания заката: «sunset» – «sun+set» – солнце + садиться). I learned that new (новую) detail on the morning of the fourth (четвёртый) day, when you said to me: "I am very fond of (люблю: «to be fond of» – любить, увлекаться чем-то) sunsets. Come, let us go look (пойдём посмотрим) at a sunset now."
1. Oh, little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the secrets of your sad little life... For a long time you had found your only entertainment in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset. I learned that new detail on the morning of the fourth day, w hen you said to me: "I am very fond of sunsets. Come, let us go look at a sunset now." 
 
2. "But we must wait (должны подождать)," I said.
"Wait? For what? (Ждать? Чего?)"
"For the sunset (заката). We must wait until it is time (пока не придёт время)." 
At first (поначалу) you seemed to be very much surprised (ты казался очень удивлённым). And then you laughed to yourself (рассмеялся: досл. рассмеялся к себе). You said to me (ты сказал мне):
"I am always thinking that I am at home (я постоянно думаю, что я дома)!" 
Just so (именно так). Everybody knows (каждый знает) that when it is noon (полдень) in the United States the sun is setting (садится) over France (над Францией). 
If you could fly to France in one minute (если бы ты мог долететь до Франции за 1 минуту: досл. в 1 минуту), you could go straight into the sunset (ты вошёл бы прямо в закат), right from noon (сразу же после полдня). Unfortunately (к несчастью), France is too far away for that (слишком далеко для этого). But on your tiny (крошечной) planet, my little prince (мой маленький принц), all you need do is move your chair a few steps (тебе достаточно переставить стул: досл. всё, что ты должен сделать, есть передвинуть твой стул на несколько шагов). You can see the day end (конец дня) and the twilight falling (как опускаются сумерки: досл. сумерки падают) whenever you like (когда бы ты ни захотел)... 
"One day (один день)," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times (видел закат 44 раза)!"
And a little later (чуть погодя) you added:
"You know – one loves the sunset, when one is so sad (опечаленные любят закат: досл. один любит закат, когда один печальный)..."
"Were you so sad, then (значит, тебе было грустно: досл. был ты так печален, тогда)?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets (на день 44 заката)? 
But the little prince made no reply (не ответил: досл. сделал ни одного ответа). 
2. "But we must wait," I said.
"Wait? For what?"
"For the sunset. We must wait until it is time." 
At first you seemed to be very much surprised. And then you laughed to yourself. You said to me:
"I am always thinking that I am at home!" 
Just so. Everybody knows that when it is noon in the United States the sun is setting over France. 
If you could fly to France in one minute, you could go straight into the sunset, right from noon. Unfortunately, France is too far away for that. But on your tiny planet, my little prince, all you need do is move your chair a few steps. You can see the day end and the twilight falling whenever you like... 
"One day," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times!"
And a little later you added:
"You know - one loves the sunset, when one is so sad..."
"Were you so sad, then?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets? 
But the little prince made no reply.
	

Chapter 7
1. On the fifth (пятый) day – again (опять), as always (как всегда), it was thanks to the sheep (это было благодаря ягнёнку) – the secret of the little prince's life (секрет жизни маленького принца) was revealed (был открыт) to me. Abruptly (резко), without anything to lead up to it (совершенно внезапно: досл. без чего-то подготавливающему к этому: «to lead up to» – подготовить), and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem (как если бы вопрос родился из долгих и молчаливых раздумий (медитаций) над его проблемой), he demanded (потребовал):
"A sheep – if it eats little bushes (ест маленький кусты), does it eat flowers, too (ест он также цветы)?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach (ест всё, что находит в пределах своей досягаемости)."
"Even (даже) flowers that have thorns (шипы)?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns –  what use are they (какой в них прок: досл. какая польза есть они)?" 
I did not know (я не знал). At that moment (в тот момент) I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt (был занят, пытаясь отвинтить болт) that had got stuck in my engine (который застрял в двигателе). I was very much worried (был очень обеспокоен), for it was becoming clear to me (так как до меня доходило) that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious (поломка моего самолёта была чрезвычайно серьёзной). And I had so little drinking-water left (и у меня так мало осталось питьевой воды) that I had to fear for the worst (я начал бояться наихудшего). "The thorns – what use are they?" 
The little prince never let go of a question (всегда настаивал: досл. никогда не отпускал вопроса), once he had asked it (однажды задав его). As for me (что касается меня), I was upset over that bolt (был расстроен из-за болта). And I answered with the first thing (первая мысль) that came into my head (пришла в мою голову):
"The thorns are of no use at all (от шипов вообще никакой пользы). Flowers have thorns just for spite (у цветов шипы от злости)!"
"Oh!" 
There was a moment of complete silence (момент полнейшей тишины). Then the little prince flashed back at me (выпалил мне: «flash» – вспышка), with a kind of resentfulness (с обидой: досл. с видом обиженности): "I don't believe (верить) you! Flowers are weak creatures (слабые существа). They are naіve (наивные). They reassure themselves as best they can (успокаивают себя как только могут: досл. успокаивают себя наилучше они могут). They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons (ужасное оружие)..."
1. On the fifth day - again, as always, it was thanks to the sheep - the secret of the little prince's life was revealed to me. Abruptly, without anything to lead up to it, and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem, he demanded:
"A sheep - if it eats little bushes, does it eat flowers, too?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach."
"Even flowers that have thorns?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns - what use are they?" 
I did not know. At that moment I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt that had got stuck in my engine. I was very much worried, for it was becoming clear to me that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious. And I had so little drinking-water left that I had to fear for the worst. "The thorns-- what use are they?" 
The little prince never let go of a question, once he had asked it. As for me, I was upset over that bolt. And I answered with the first thing that came into my head:
"The thorns are of no use at all. Flowers have thorns just for spite!"
"Oh!" 
There was a moment of complete silence. Then the little prince flashed back at me, with a kind of resentfulness: "I don't believe you! Flowers are weak creatures. They are naive. They reassure themselves as best they can. They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons..." 
 
2. I did not answer (я не ответил). At that instant (в то мгновение) I was saying to myself (я сказал себе): "If this bolt still won't turn (если этот болт не провернётся), I am going to knock it out with the hammer (я выбью его молотом)." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts (побеспокоил мои мысли). "And you actually (действительно) believe that the flowers – "
"Oh, no!" I cried (закричал). "No, no no! I don't believe anything (я ни во что не верю). I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see (неужели ты не видишь) – I am very busy with matters of consequence (досл. делом особой важности)!" 
He stared at me, thunderstruck (уставился на меня, словно поражённый громом).
"Matters of consequence!" 
He looked at me there (он смотрел на меня), with my hammer in my hand (с молотом в руке), my fingers black with engine-grease (пальцы чёрные от моторного масла), bending down over an object (согнувшегося на штуковиной) which seemed to him extremely ugly (которая казалась ему невероятно уродливой)...
"You talk just like the grown-ups (ты говоришь, как взрослый)!"
That made me a little ashamed (мне стало немного стыдно: досл. это сделало меня немного застыдившимся). But he went on (продолжал), relentlessly (неумолимо):
"You mix everything up together (ты всё смешал вместе)... You confuse everything (спутал всё)..." 
He was really very angry (злой). He tossed his golden curls in the breeze (он встряхнул своими золотыми кудрями на ветру).
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced (некоторый краснолицый) gentleman. He has never smelled a flower (не знает запаха цветов: никогда не нюхал: «to smell – smelled» –  пахнуть, чувствовать запах). He has never looked at a star (не глядел на звёзды). He has never loved any one (никогда никого не любил). He has never done anything in his life (он ничего не делал в своей жизни) but add up figures (только складывал цифры). And all day he says over and over, just like you (и весь день он повторял снова и снова, точно как ты): 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride (это заставляло его раздуваться о гордости: «swell up» – распухать). But he is not a man (он не человек) – he is a mushroom (гриб)!"
"A what (Что)?"
"A mushroom!" 
The little prince was now white with rage (побелел от ярости: досл. был сейчас белый с яростью).
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years (растили шипы миллионы лет). For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same (миллионы лет овцы если их, точно также). And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them (почему цветы утруждают себя, взращивая шипы, от которых нет пользы: досл. почему цветы идут в так много забот)? Is the warfare (война) between (между) the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence (не более ли это важно) than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums (чем суммы краснолицего джентельмена)? And if I know – I, myself (я, лично) – one flower which is unique in the world (единственный в мире), which grows nowhere but on my planet (нигде не растет, кроме моей планеты: досл. растет нигде, только на моей планете), but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning (но которое один ягнёнок может уничтожить в одно мгновение какого-то утра), without even noticing what he is doing (даже не замечая, что делает) – Oh! You think that is not important!" 
His face turned from white to red (превратилось с белого в красное) as he continued (по мере того, как он продолжал: «to continue – continued» – продолжать):
"If some one loves a flower (если кто-то любит цветок), of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars (цветение которого одно на миллионы звезд: досл. которого только одно цветение растёт во всех миллионах и миллионах звезд), it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars (этого достаточно, чтобы сделать его счастливым, когда он смотрит на звезды). He can say to himself (он может сказать себе), 'Somewhere, my flower is there... (где-то там мой цветок…)' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened (все его звёзды померкнут)... And you think that is not important!" 
He could not say anything more (ему нечего было добавить). His words were choked (были задушены) by sobbing (рыданием). 
The night had fallen (наступила ночь: досл. ночь упала). I had let my tools drop from my hands (я оставил инструменты: досл. дал инструментам выпасть из моих рук). Of what moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death (и какое значение имели мой молот, болт, жажда или смерть: «moment» в устойчивых выражениях может означать «важность»)? On one star, one planet, my planet (моей планете), the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted (был маленький принц, который нуждался в утешении). I took him in my arms (взял на руки), and rocked (качать) him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger (цветок, который ты любишь, в безопасности: досл. не есть в опасности). I will draw you a muzzle (намордник) for your sheep. I will draw you a railing (ограду) to put around your flower (поставить вокруг цветка). I will – " 
I did not know what to say to him (я не знал, что ему сказать). I felt awkward and blundering (я чувствовал себя неудобно и глупо: досл. ошибочно). I did not know how I could reach him (я не знал, как его достичь), where (где) I could overtake (обогнать) him and go on hand in hand with him once more (идти рука об руку с ним ещё раз). 
It is such a secret place, the land of tears (это такое тайное место, земля слёз). 
2. I did not answer. At that instant I was saying to myself: "If this bolt still won't turn, I am going to knock it out with the hammer." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts. "And you actually believe that the flowers - "
"Oh, no!" I cried. "No, no no! I don't believe anything. I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see - I am very busy with matters of consequence!" 
He stared at me, thunderstruck.
"Matters of consequence!" 
He looked at me there, with my hammer in my hand, my fingers black with engine-grease, bending down over an object which seemed to him extremely ugly...
"You talk just like the grown-ups!"
That made me a little ashamed. But he went on, relentlessly:
"You mix everything up together... You confuse everything..." 
He was really very angry. He tossed his golden curls in the breeze.
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced gentleman. He has never smelled a flower. He has never looked at a star. He has never loved any one. He has never done anything in his life but add up figures. And all day he says over and over, just like you: 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride. But he is not a man-- he is a mushroom!"
"A what?"
"A mushroom!" 
The little prince was now white with rage.
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years. For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same. And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them? Is the warfare between the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums? And if I know - I, myself - one flower which is unique in the world, which grows nowhere but on my planet, but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning, without even noticing what he is doing-- Oh! You think that is not important!" 
His face turned from white to red as he continued:
"If some one loves a flower, of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars, it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars. He can say to himself, 'Somewhere, my flower is there...' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened... And you think that is not important!" 
He could not say anything more. His words were choked by sobbing. 
The night had fallen. I had let my tools drop from my hands. Of what moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death? On one star, one planet, my planet, the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted. I took him in my arms, and rocked him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger. I will draw you a muzzle for your sheep. I will draw you a railing to put around your flower. I will - " 
I did not know what to say to him. I felt awkward and blundering. I did not know how I could reach him, where I could overtake him and go on hand in hand with him once more. 
It is such a secret place, the land of tears. 

Chapter 8
1. I soon learned to know this flower better (вскоре я узнал этот цветок лучше: досл. я научился знать). On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple (всегда были очень просты). They had only one ring of petals (кольцо лепестков); they took up no room at all (не занимали места: «room» не только «комната», но и «место»); they were a trouble to nobody (никому не создавали проблем: досл. были проблемой для никого). One morning they would appear in the grass (утром они появлялись в траве), and by night they would have faded peacefully away (к ночи мирно исчезали: досл. ночью увядали мирно прочь: «to fade – faded» – увядать, линять). But one day, from a seed (семена) blown from no one knew where (принесённому ветром неизвестно откуда: «to blow – blown» – дуть), a new flower had come up (появился); and the little prince had watched very closely (наблюдал очень внимательно: досл. очень близко) over this small sprout (росток) which was not like any other small sprouts (который не походил на другие маленькие ростки) on his planet. It might (это мог), you see (понимаете), have been a new kind (новый вид) of baobab. 
The shrub (куст) soon stopped growing (перестал расти вскоре: досл. вскоре остановил рост), and began to get ready to produce a flower (и собрался цвести: досл. начал ставать готов производить цветок). The little prince, who was present (присутствовал) at the first appearance (появление) of a huge bud (огромного бутона), felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition (предчувствовал сразу же чудесное видение) must emerge from it (которое должно было появиться с этого). But the flower was not satisfied (но цветку было мало: досл. цветок не был удовлетворен) to complete the preparations for her beauty (завершить приготовления к своей красоте: «to prepare» – приготовить, «preparation» – приготовления) in the shelter of her green chamber (в укрытии его зелёных покоев: в англ. «flower» – she (она), поэтому «her», а рус. цветок – муж. рода). She chose her colors with the greatest care (он (она) подбирал цвета особо тщательно: досл. с величайшей заботой). She adjusted (приводил(а) в порядок) her petals (лепестки) one by one (один за другим). She did not wish to go out into the world (он(а) не хотел(а) появляться в этот мир) all rumpled (мятый), like the field poppies (полевые маки). It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear (он(а) хотел(а) появиться в полном сиянии своей красоты: досл. это было только полное сияние ее красоты, что она хотела появиться). Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature (кокетливое создание)! And her mysterious adornment (её таинственное украшение) lasted for days and days (длилось многие дни). 
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise (точно на рассвете), she suddenly showed herself (она внезапно показала себя). And, after working with all this painstaking precision (после такой старательной, четкой работы: досл. после работы со всей этой старательной четкостью), she yawned (зевнула) and said:
"Ah! I am scarcely awake (я не вполне проснулась). I beg that you will excuse me (прошу прощения: досл. я прошу, чтобы вы извинили меня). My petals are still all disarranged (мои лепестки в таком беспорядке)..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration (не смог удержать свой восторг):
"Oh! How beautiful you are (какая ты красивая)!"
"Am I not (не правда ли: досл. не есть я)?" the flower responded, sweetly (ответила сладко). "And I was born at the same moment as the sun... (я родилась одновременно с солнцем)"
The little prince could guess easily enough (мог сразу догадаться: «to guess – guessed» – догадываться) that she was not any too modest (она была не слишком скромна) – but how moving (трогательной) – and exciting (волнующей) – she was! "I think it is time for breakfast (думаю, пора завтракать: досл. это есть время для завтрака)," she added an instant later (мгновение спустя). "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs (если вы будете так добры и позаботитесь о мне: досл. если вы имели бы доброту подумать о моих потребностях) – " 
And the little prince, completely abashed (совсем смущённый), went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water (пошёл искать лейку со свежей водой: «sprinkling» – брызгающий, «can» – бидон). 
1. I soon learned to know this flower better. On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple. They had only one ring of petals; they took up no room at all; they were a trouble to nobody. One morning they would appear in the grass, and by night they would have faded peacefully away. But one day, from a seed blown from no one knew where, a new flower had come up; and the little prince had watched very closely over this small sprout which was not like any other small sprouts on his planet. It might, you see, have been a new kind of baobab. 
The shrub soon stopped growing, and began to get ready to produce a flower. The little prince, who was present at the first appearance of a huge bud, felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition must emerge from it. But the flower was not satisfied to complete the preparations for her beauty in the shelter of her green chamber. She chose her colors with the greatest care. She adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to go out into the world all rumpled, like the field poppies. It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear. Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature! And her mysterious adornment lasted for days and days. 
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise, she suddenly showed herself. And, after working with all this painstaking precision, she yawned and said:
"Ah! I am scarcely awake. I beg that you will excuse me. My petals are still all disarranged..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration:
"Oh! How beautiful you are!"
"Am I not?" the flower responded, sweetly. "And I was born at the same moment as the sun..."
The little prince could guess easily enough that she was not any too modest – but how moving – and exciting – she was! "I think it is time for breakfast," she added an instant later. "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs – " 
And the little prince, completely abashed, went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water. 



2. So, he tended (заботился: «to tend – tended» – заботиться) the flower. 
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity (так же и она начала очень скоро мучить его своим тщеславием) – which was (которое было), if the truth be known (если говорить по правде: досл. если правда известна), a little difficult to deal with (немного трудно было иметь дело: «to deal with» – иметь дело). One day, for instance (например), when she was speaking of her four thorns (четыре шипа), she said to the little prince: "Let the tigers come with their claws (пусть только появятся тигры с их когтями)!" 
2. So, he tended the flower. 
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity - which was, if the truth be known, a little difficult to deal with. One day, for instance, when she was speaking of her four thorns, she said to the little prince: "Let the tigers come with their claws!"
 
3. "There are no tigers on my planet (на моей планете нет тигров)," the little prince objected (возразил). "And, anyway (в любом случае), tigers do not eat weeds (бурьян)." "I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly. "Please excuse me... (извини меня)". "I am not at all afraid of tigers (я вообще не боюсь тигров)," she went on (продолжала), "but I have a horror of drafts (сквозняки). I suppose (предполагаю) you wouldn't have a screen (у тебя не найдётся ширмы) for me?" "A horror of drafts (боязнь сквозняков) – that is bad luck (несчастье), for a plant (растение)," remarked (заметил) the little prince, and added to himself (и про себя добавил), "This flower is a very complex (запутанный, составной, сложный) creature..." "At night I want you to put me under a glass globe (накрыл меня стеклянным шаром: досл. я хочу, чтобы ты поставил меня под…). It is very cold (очень холодно) where you live. In the place I came from (там, откуда я пришла) – "
3. "There are no tigers on my planet," the little prince objected. "And, anyway, tigers do not eat weeds." "I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly. "Please excuse me..." "I am not at all afraid of tigers," she went on, "but I have a horror of drafts. I suppose you wouldn't have a screen for me?" "A horror of drafts - that is bad luck, for a plant," remarked the little prince, and added to himself, "This flower is a very complex creature..." "At night I want you to put me under a glass globe. It is very cold where you live. In the place I came from - " 
 
4. But she interrupted herself at that point (замолчала: досл. прервала себя по этому поводу). She had come in the form of a seed (пришла в форме семена). She could not have known anything of any other worlds (не могла что-либо знать о других мирах). Embarrassed  over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a naive untruth (смущенная, что попалась на такой простой неправде: досл. дала себе быть пойманной на краю…), she coughed (кашлянула) two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong (чтобы маленький принц почувствовал себя виноватым: досл. в порядке чтобы поставить маленького принца в «неправильность»). "The screen?" "I was just going to look for it (я как раз собирался идти искать её) when you spoke to me..."
4. But she interrupted herself at that point. She had come in the form of a seed. She could not have known anything of any other worlds. Embarrassed over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a naive untruth, she coughed two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong. "The screen?" "I was just going to look for it when you spoke to me..."
 
5. Then she forced her cough a little more (немного усилила кашель) so that he should suffer from remorse just the same (чтобы и он страдал от угрызений совести точно так же). 
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love (несмотря на все добрые намерения, которые были неотделимы от его любви), had soon come to doubt her (вскоре начал в ней сомневаться: досл. пришёл к сомнению). He had taken seriously words which were without importance (воспринимал всерьез несерьезные слова: досл. брал серьезно слова, которые были без важности), and it made him very unhappy (от этого был несчастлив: досл. это делало его несчастливым). "I ought not to have listened to her (я не должен был ее слушать)," he confided (доверился) to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers (не надо слушать цветы). One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance (нужно просто смотреть на них и вдыхать их аромат). Mine perfumed all my planet (мой цветок сделал всю планету благоухающей). But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace (не знал, как найти удовольствие в ее изяществе). This tale of claws (басни о коготках), which disturbed me so much (которые меня так беспокоили), should only have filled my heart (наполняли моё сердце) with tenderness and pity (нежностью и состраданием)." 
And he continued his confidences (продолжал свое признание):
"The fact is (дело в том) that I did not know how to understand anything (не знал, как понять)! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words (я должен был судить по делам, а не по словам). She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me (окутывала меня своим ароматом и сиянием). I ought never to have run away (не должен был убегать) from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection (привязанность) that lay behind her poor little stratagems (которая скрывалась за ее маленькими бедными уловками: досл. лежало за…).
Flowers are so inconsistent (непоследовательны)! But I was too young to know how to love her... (но я был слишком юн, чтобы знать, как её любить)" 
5. Then she forced her cough a little more so that he should suffer from remorse just the same. 
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love, had soon come to doubt her. He had taken seriously words which were without importance, and it made him very unhappy. "I ought not to have listened to her," he confided to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers. One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance. Mine perfumed all my planet. But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace. This tale of claws, which disturbed me so much, should only have filled my heart with tenderness and pity." 
And he continued his confidences:
"The fact is that I did not know how to understand anything! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words. She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me. I ought never to have run away from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection that lay behind her poor little stratagems.
Flowers are so inconsistent! But I was too young to know how to love her..."

Chapter 9
1. I believe (верю) that for his escape (для его побега) he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds (он предпочел улететь со стаей диких птиц: досл. он взял преимущество миграции стаи диких птиц). On the morning of his departure (в утро его отбытия) he put his planet in perfect order (он привел планету в идеальный порядок). He carefully cleaned out (тщательно почистил) his active volcanoes. He possessed (владел) two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning (на них удобно было готовить завтрак по утрам: досл. они были удобны для того, чтобы жарить). He also had one volcano that was extinct (потухший). But, as he said (как он говорил), "One never knows! (кто его знает: досл. один никогда знает)" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out (хорошо почищены), volcanoes burn slowly and steadily (горят медленно и спокойно (монотонно)), without any eruptions (без каких-либо извержений). Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney (как огонь в дымоходе). 
On our earth (у нас: досл. на нашей земле) we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes (мы ещё не доросли до того, чтобы чистить наши вулканы). That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us (вот почему они нас постоянно беспокоят: досл. вот почему они не приносят конца проблем для нас). 
The little prince also pulled up (выполол), with a certain sense of dejection (с каким-то унынием: досл. с некоторым чувством уныния), the last little shoots of the baobabs (последние маленькие ростки баобабов). He believed that he would never want to return (он верил, что не захочет вернуться). But on this last morning (в то последнее утро) all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him (все эти обычные заботы (задания) были ему очень дороги). And when he watered the flower (полили цветок) for the last time, and prepared to place (приготовился поместить) her under the shelter of her glass globe (под стеклянный колпак), he realized (осознал) that he was very close to tears (что готов расплакаться: досл. был близок к слезам). "Goodbye," he said to the flower. 
But she made no answer (не ответила).
"Goodbye," he said again (опять).
The flower coughed (кашлянула). But it was not because she had a cold (но не потому, что ей было холодно).
"I have been silly (я была глупа)," she said to him, at last (наконец). "I ask your forgiveness (я прошу твоего прощения). Try to be happy (постарайся быть счастливым)..." 
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches (он был удивлён этим отсутствием упреков). He stood there all bewildered (он стоял там весь смущенный), the glass globe held arrested in mid-air (стеклянный колпак повис на полпути: досл. держался остановленным в «среднем воздухе»). He did not understand this quiet sweetness (этой тихой нежности).
"Of course I love you (конечно же я тебя люблю)," the flower said to him. "It is my fault (это моя вина) that you have not known it all the while (что ты не знал это все это время). That is of no importance (это неважно). But you (но ты) — you have been just as foolish as I (ты был таким же дураком, как и я). Try to be happy... let the glass globe be (оставь колпак). I don't want it any more (мне он больше не нужен: досл. я не хочу его больше)."
"But the wind (но ветер) — "
"My cold is not so bad as all that (моя простуда не так плоха как все это)... the cool night air will do me good (холодный ночной воздух мне полезен: досл. делает мне хорошо). I am a flower."
"But the animals (животные) —"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars (я должна вытерпеть присутствие двух или трех гусениц) if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies (если хочу познакомиться с бабочками). It seems that they are very beautiful (кажется, они очень красивые). And if not the butterflies – and the caterpillars — who will call upon me (кто будет со мной говорить)? You will be far away (ты будешь далеко)... as for the large animals (что касается больших животных) — I am not at all afraid of any of them (я вообще их не боюсь). I have my claws (когти)." 
And, naively (наивно), she showed her four thorns (шипы). Then she added: "Don't linger like this (не задерживайся здесь (сейчас)). You have decided to go away (ты решил уйти). Now go (так иди: досл. теперь иди)!" For she did not want him to see her crying (она не хотела, чтобы он видел ее плачущей). She was such a proud flower (она была таким гордым цветком)... 
1. I believe that for his escape he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds. On the morning of his departure he put his planet in perfect order. He carefully cleaned out his active volcanoes. He possessed two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning. He also had one volcano that was extinct. But, as he said, "One never knows!" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out, volcanoes burn slowly and steadily, without any eruptions. Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney. 
On our earth we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes. That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us. 
The little prince also pulled up, with a certain sense of dejection, the last little shoots of the baobabs. He believed that he would never want to return. But on this last morning all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him. And when he watered the flower for the last time, and prepared to place her under the shelter of her glass globe, he realized that he was very close to tears. "Goodbye," he said to the flower. 
But she made no answer.
"Goodbye," he said again.
The flower coughed. But it was not because she had a cold.
"I have been silly," she said to him, at last. "I ask your forgiveness. Try to be happy..." 
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches. He stood there all bewildered, the glass globe held arrested in mid-air. He did not understand this quiet sweetness.
"Of course I love you," the flower said to him. "It is my fault that you have not known it all the while. That is of no importance. But you - you have been just as foolish as I. Try to be happy... let the glass globe be. I don't want it any more."
"But the wind - "
"My cold is not so bad as all that... the cool night air will do me good. I am a flower."
"But the animals -"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies. It seems that they are very beautiful. And if not the butterflies - and the caterpillars - who will call upon me? You will be far away... as for the large animals - I am not at all afraid of any of them. I have my claws." 
And, naively, she showed her four thorns. Then she added: "Don't linger like this. You have decided to go away. Now go!" For she did not want him to see her crying. She was such a proud flower...
 

Chapter 10
1. He found himself in the neighborhood  (оказался по соседству: досл. нашел себя в соседстве) of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them (поэтому он начал с визита на них: «to begіn — began» — начать), in order to add to his knowledge (чтобы пополнить знания: «in order to» — для того, чтобы). 
The first of them was inhabited by a king (на первом жил король: досл. был населен королем). Clad in royal purple and ermine (одетый в королевское одеяние с горностаем ), he was seated upon a throne (он сидел на троне) which was at the same time both simple and majestic (который был прост и прекрасен: досл. который в одно и то же время был оба прост и прекрасен).
"Ah! Here is a subject (а вот и подчиненный)," exclaimed (воскликнул) the king, when he saw the little prince coming (когда увидел, как появился маленький принц: досл. увидел приходящего).
And the little prince asked himself (сам себя):
"How could he recognize (узнать) me when he had never seen me before (никогда не видел до того)?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings (что короли воспринимают мир упрощенно: досл. как мир упрощен для королей). To them, all men are subjects (для них все люди подданные).
"Approach, so that I may see you better, (подойди, дабы я мог видеть тебя лучше)" said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody (был невероятно горд быть королем хоть для кого-то). 
1. He found himself in the neighborhood of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them, in order to add to his knowledge 
The first of them was inhabited by a king. Clad in royal purple and ermine, he was seated upon a throne which was at the same time both simple and majestic.
"Ah! Here is a subject," exclaimed the king, when he saw the little prince coming.
And the little prince asked himself:
"How could he recognize me when he had never seen me before?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings. To them, all men are subjects.
"Approach, so that I may see you better," said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody.  
2. The little prince looked everywhere (огляделся: досл. смотрел везде) to find a place to sit down (присесть); but the entire (вся) planet was crammed (переполнен) and obstructed (загроможден) by the king's magnificent ermine robe (прекрасной королевской горностаевой мантией). So he remained standing upright (поэтому он стоял: досл. оставался стоять прямо), and, since he was tired (так как он устал), he yawned (зевнул: «to yawn — yawned» — зевать).
"It is contrary to etiquette (это перечит правилам этикета) to yawn in the presence of a king, (в присутствии короля)" the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so (я запрещаю тебе делать так)."
"I can't help it (ничего не поделаешь: досл. я не могу помочь этому). I can't stop myself (не могу остановиться)," replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed (совершенно сбитый с толку). "I have come on a long journey (я долго был в пути), and I have had no sleep (не спал: досл. не имел сна)…"
"Ah, then (ну тогда)," the king said. "I order you to yawn (приказываю тебе зевать). It is years since I have seen anyone yawning (я много лет уже не видел, как зевают). Yawns, to me (для меня), are objects of curiosity (интересны: досл. предмет любопытства). Come, now (Ну, давай)! Yawn again (зевни опять)! It is an order (это приказ)."
"That frightens (пугает) me... I cannot, any more..." murmured (пробормотал) the little prince, now completely abashed (совершенно сконфуженный).
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I - I order you sometimes to yawn (иногда зевать) and sometimes to - "
He sputtered (засуетился) a little, and seemed vexed (казалось огорчился).
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon (на чем король обстоятельно настаивал) was that his authority should be respected (чтобы его власть уважалась). He tolerated no disobedience (он не терпел непослушания). He was an absolute monarch (абсолютный монарх). But, because he was a very good man (но поскольку он был очень хорошим человеком), he made his orders reasonable (он делал свои приказы разумными).
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example (для примера: досл. дорогой примера), "if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird (превратиться на морскую птицу), and if the general did not obey me (не послушает), that would not be the fault of the general (это не была бы вина генерала). It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince (поступила застенчивая просьба от маленького принца).
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle (и величественно собрал складки своей мантии).
But the little prince was wondering (удивлен)... The planet was tiny (крошечная). Over what could this king really rule (чем мог король тут править)?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg (прошу) that you will excuse my asking you a question – (извинить меня за вопрос: досл. извинить мое задавание вопроса)"
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him (поспешил заверить его).
"Sire - over what do you rule (Сир — чем Вы правите)?"
"Over everything (всем)," said the king, with magnificent simplicity (с величественной простотой).
"Over everything?" 
The king made a gesture (жест), which took in his planet, the other planets, and all the stars (который захватил его планету, другие планеты и все звезды).
"Over all that (всем этим)?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered. 
For his rule was not only absolute (власть была не только абсолютной): it was also universal (также вселенской).
"And the stars obey you (звезды подчиняются Вам)?"
"Certainly they do (естественно: досл. конечно они так делают)," the king said. "They obey instantly (подчиняются немедля). I do not permit insubordination (не позволяю непослушания)." 
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at (такая власть удивляла маленького принца: досл. была предметом для маленького принца удивляться). If he had been master of such complete authority (если бы он располагал такой безграничной властью: досл. был хозяином такой полной власти), he would have been able to watch the sunset (он смог бы видеть закат), not forty-four times in one day (не 44 раза на день), but seventy-two (72), or even a hundred (даже 100), or even two hundred times (или даже 200), without ever having to move his chair (даже не передвигая стул). And because (потому) he felt a bit sad (он немного взгрустнул: досл. почувствовал немного грусти) as he remembered (вспомнил) his little planet which he had forsaken (которую он покинул: «to forsake — forsook — forsaken» — покидать, бросать), he plucked up his courage (фразеологизм: набрался храбрости) to ask the king a favor (попросить об услуге (милости):
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness (будьте так добры: досл. сделайте мне такое добро)... Order the sun to set (прикажите солнцу сесть)... "
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly (порхать с цветка на цветок, как бабочка), or to write a tragic drama (написать трагедию), or to change himself into a sea bird (превратиться в морскую птицу), and if the general did not carry out (выполнит) the order that he had received (приказ, который получил), which one of us would be in the wrong? (который из нас был бы неправ)" the king demanded (настаивал). "The general, or myself? (генерал или я)"
"You," said the little prince firmly (непоколебимо).
"Exactly (точно). One must require from each one (можно требовать от человека) the duty which each one can perform (обязанности, которые он может выполнить)," the king went on (продолжал). "Accepted authority (общепризнанная власть) rests first of all on reason (покоится прежде всего на разуме). If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea (броситься в море), they would rise up in revolution (они восстанут: досл. поднимутся в революции). I have the right to require obedience (у меня есть право требовать послушания) because my orders are reasonable (потому что мои приказы разумны)."
"Then my sunset (тогда как мой закат)?" the little prince reminded (напомнил) him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it (он никогда не забыл однажды заданных вопросов).
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it (я прикажу это). But, according to my science of government (согласно моей науке управления), I shall wait until conditions are favorable (я должен подождать благоприятных условий)."
"When will that be (когда это будет)?" inquired (осведомился) the little prince.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else (прежде, чем что-либо сказать) he consulted a bulky almanac (заглянул в большой календарь: досл. проконсультировался). "Hum! Hum! That will be about (это будет около) - about - that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight (сегодня вечером около 20 минут восьмого). And you will see how well I am obeyed (как меня почитают: досл. как меня слушают)."

2. The little prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down; but the entire planet was crammed and obstructed by the king's magnificent ermine robe. So he remained standing upright, and, since he was tired, he yawned.
"It is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king," the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so."
"I can't help it. I can't stop myself," replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed. "I have come on a long journey, and I have had no sleep..."
"Ah, then," the king said. "I order you to yawn. It is years since I have seen anyone yawning. Yawns, to me, are objects of curiosity. Come, now! Yawn again! It is an order."
"That frightens me... I cannot, any more..." murmured the little prince, now completely abashed.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I - I order you sometimes to yawn and sometimes to - "
He sputtered a little, and seemed vexed.
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon was that his authority should be respected. He tolerated no disobedience. He was an absolute monarch. But, because he was a very good man, he made his orders reasonable.
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example, "if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not obey me, that would not be the fault of the general. It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince.
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle.
But the little prince was wondering... The planet was tiny. Over what could this king really rule?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg that you will excuse my asking you a question - "
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him.
"Sire - over what do you rule?"
"Over everything," said the king, with magnificent simplicity.
"Over everything?" 
The king made a gesture, which took in his planet, the other planets, and all the stars.
"Over all that?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered. 
For his rule was not only absolute: it was also universal.
"And the stars obey you?"
"Certainly they do," the king said. "They obey instantly. I do not permit insubordination." 
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at. If he had been master of such complete authority, he would have been able to watch the sunset, not forty-four times in one day, but seventy-two, or even a hundred, or even two hundred times, with out ever having to move his chair. And because he felt a bit sad as he remembered his little planet which he had forsaken, he plucked up his courage to ask the king a favor:
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness... Order the sun to set..."
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly, or to write a tragic drama, or to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not carry out the order that he had received, which one of us would be in the wrong?" the king demanded. "The general, or myself?"
"You," said the little prince firmly.
"Exactly. One much require from each one the duty which each one can perform," the king went on. "Accepted authority rests first of all on reason. If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea, they would rise up in revolution. I have the right to require obedience because my orders are reasonable."
"Then my sunset?" the little prince reminded him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it.
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it. But, according to my science of government, I shall wait until conditions are favorable."
"When will that be?" inquired the little prince.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else he consulted a bulky almanac. "Hum! Hum! That will be about - about - that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight. And you will see how well I am obeyed."
3. The little prince yawned. He was regretting (сожалел) his lost (потерянный) sunset. And then, too, he was already beginning to be a little bored (ему уже стало скучно: досл. ему начинало становиться скучно).
"I have nothing more to do here (мне нечего больше здесь)," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again (поэтому я отправляюсь снова в путь)." "Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister (сделаю тебя министром)!"
"Minister of what (министром чего)?"
"Minster of - of Justice! (правосудия)"
"But there is nobody here to judge (но здесь некого судить)!"
"We do not know that (мы этого не знаем)," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom (я еще не осмотрел свои владения: досл. я еще не сделал полный обход). I am very old (я очень стар). There is no room (места) here for a carriage (повозка, карета). And it tires me to walk (ходьба меня утомляет)." 
"Oh, but I have looked already (я уже посмотрел)!" said the little prince, turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet (повернулся, чтобы еще раз взглянуть на другую сторону планеты). On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all (там, как и здесь, никого нет)...
"Then you shall judge yourself (будешь судить себя)," the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all (это тяжелее всего). It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others (значительно тяжелее судить себя самого, чем судить других). If you succeed in (если ты преуспеешь) judging yourself rightly (объективно), then you are indeed a man of true wisdom (ты станешь человеком истинной мудрости)."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere (судить себя можно везде). I do not need to live (мне не нужно жить) on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe (у меня есть причины полагать) that somewhere (где-то) on my planet there is an old rat (крыса). I hear him at night (слышу ее ночью). You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death (приговорить к смерти). Thus his life will depend on your justice (но ее жизнь будет зависеть от твоего правосудия). But you will pardon him on each occasion (будешь миловать каждый раз); for he must be treated thriftily (к ней надо относиться бережно). He is the only one we have (она у нас одна-единственная)."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death (мне не нравится приговаривать к смерти). And now I think I will go on my way (я, пожалуй, пойду)."
"No," said the king. 
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure (закончив приготовления к отбытию), had no wish to grieve the old monarch (не хотел печалить старого монарха).
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed (полного подчинения)," he said, "he should be able to give me a reasonable order (сможет дать мне разумный приказ). He should be able, for example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute (приказать мне уйти по истечению этой минуты). It seems to me that conditions are favorable (мне кажется, что условия подходящие)..."
As the king made no answer (не ответил: досл. не сделал ответа), the little prince hesitated (колебался) a moment. Then, with a sigh (вздох), he took his leave (отбыл: досл. взял свой уход).
"I made you my Ambassador (посол)," the king called out (выкрикнул), hastily (поспешно).
He had a magnificent air of authority (его власть была удивительна (прекрасна)).
"The grown-ups are very strange (странные)," the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey (продолжал свой путь).
3. The little prince yawned. He was regretting his lost sunset. And then, too, he was already beginning to be a little bored.
"I have nothing more to do here," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again." "Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister!"
"Minister of what?"
"Minster of - of Justice!"
"But there is nobody here to judge!"
"We do not know that," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom. I am very old. There is no room here for a carriage. And it tires me to walk." 
"Oh, but I have looked already!" said the little prince, turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet. On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all...
"Then you shall judge yourself," the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all. It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others. If you succeed in judging yourself rightly, then you are indeed a man of true wisdom."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere. I do not need to live on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe that somewhere on my planet there is an old rat. I hear him at night. You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death. Thus his life will depend on your justice. But you will pardon him on each occasion; for he must be treated thriftily. He is the only one we have."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death. And now I think I will go on my way."
"No," said the king. 
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure, had no wish to grieve the old monarch.
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed," he said, "he should be able to give me a reasonable order. He should be able, for example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute. It seems to me that conditions are favorable..."
As the king made no answer, the little prince hesitated a moment. Then, with a sigh, he took his leave.
"I made you my Ambassador," the king called out, hastily.
He had a magnificent air of authority.
"The grown-ups are very strange," the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 11
1. The second planet was inhabited (вторая планета была населена) by a conceited man (себялюбцем: досл. тщеславным, самоуверенным человеком). "Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer (кажется, у меня поклонник: досл. я есть около получения визита почитателем)!" he exclaimed from afar (издали), when he first (впервые) saw the little prince coming (пришел).
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers (для тщеславного все другие — поклонники). 
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing (какая у Вас чудная шляпа: досл. это чудная шляпа Вы носите)."
"It is a hat for salutes (для приветствия)," the conceited man replied (ответил). "It is to raise in salute (дабы поднимать ее в приветствии) when people acclaim (шумно приветствовать) me. Unfortunately (к сожалению), nobody at all ever passes this way (вообще никто никогда здесь не проходил)."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about (не понимал, о чем говорит тщеславный человек).
"Clap your hands, one against the other (хлопни, ударь ладонями друг по другу)," the conceited man now directed (приказал) him. 
1. The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man. "Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!" he exclaimed from afar, when he first saw the little prince coming.
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers. 
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing."
"It is a hat for salutes," the conceited man replied. "It is to raise in salute when people acclaim me. Unfortunately, nobody at all ever passes this way."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about.
"Clap your hands, one against the other," the conceited man now directed him. 

 
2. The little prince clapped his hands (хлопнул). The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute (поднял шляпу в скромном приветствии).
"This is more entertaining (куда занимательнее) than the visit to the king (чем визит к королю)," the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands (начал опять хлопать), one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise (после пяти минут таких упражнений) the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony (устал от монотонности игры).
"And what should one do to make the hat come down (что нужно сделать, дабы шляпа упала, опустилась)?" he asked. 
But the conceited man did not hear him (не слышал его). Conceited people never hear anything but praise (себялюбцы не слышат ничего, кроме похвалы).
"Do you really admire me very much (ты действительно мной восхищен)?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean - 'admire' (что значит — восхищен)?"
"To admire mean that you regard me (расцениваешь меня) as the handsomest (наиболее симпатичного), the best-dressed (наилучше одетого), the richest (наибогатейшего), and the most intelligent (самого умного) man on this planet."
"But you are the only man (единственный) on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness (сделай милость). Admire me just the same (именно так)."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly (слегка пожав плечами), "but what is there in that to interest you so much (что в этом такого интересного)?"
And the little prince went away (ушел).
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd (взрослые действительно очень странные)," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey (продолжил путешествие). 
2. The little prince clapped his hands. The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute.
"This is more entertaining than the visit to the king," the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands, one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony.
"And what should one do to make the hat come down?" he asked. 
But the conceited man did not hear him. Conceited people never hear anything but praise.
"Do you really admire me very much?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean - 'admire'?"
"To admire mean that you regard me as the handsomest, the best-dressed, the richest, and the most intelligent man on this planet."
"But you are the only man on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness. Admire me just the same."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly, "but what is there in that to interest you so much?"
And the little prince went away.
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 12
1.The next planet was inhabited by a tippler (на следующей планете жил пьяница: досл. следующая планета была населена пьяницей). This was a very short visit (очень короткий визит), but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection (поверг в уныние).
"What are you doing there (что ты здесь делаешь)?" he said to the tippler, whom he found (которого он нашел) settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles (сидевшего в тишине перед коллекцией пустых бутылок) and also a collection of full bottles (а также полных).
"I am drinking (я пью)," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air (скорбно: досл. со скорбным воздухом). 
1.The next planet was inhabited by a tippler. This was a very short visit, but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection.
"What are you doing there?" he said to the tippler, whom he found settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles and also a collection of full bottles.
"I am drinking," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air. 

 
2. "Why are you drinking (почему ты пьешь)?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget (так я могу забыть)," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired (осведомился) the little prince, who already was sorry for him (который уже жалел его).
"Forget that I am ashamed (что мне стыдно)," the tippler confessed (сознался), hanging his head (свесив голову).
"Ashamed of what (стыдно чего)?" insisted (настаивал) the little prince, who wanted to help him (который хотел ему помочь).
"Ashamed of drinking (стыдно, что пью)!" The tippler brought his speech to an end (высказал все: досл. принес свою речь до конца), and shut himself up in an impregnable silence (и замолчал: досл. замкнул себя в неприступную тишину).
And the little prince went away (ушел прочь), puzzled (озадаченный).
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.
2. "Why are you drinking?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired the little prince, who already was sorry for him.
"Forget that I am ashamed," the tippler confessed, hanging his head.
"Ashamed of what?" insisted the little prince, who wanted to help him.
"Ashamed of drinking!" The tippler brought his speech to an end, and shut himself up in an impregnable silence.
And the little prince went away, puzzled.
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.  

Chapter 13
1. The fourth (четвертая) planet belonged to a businessman (принадлежала бизнесмену). This man was so much occupied (занят) that he did not even raise his head (даже не поднял головы) at the little prince's arrival (по прибытии маленького принца).
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out (погасла)."
"Three and two make five (3 + 2 = 5). Five and seven make twelve (5 + 7 = 12). Twelve and three make fifteen (12 + 3 = 15). Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two (15 + 7 = 22). Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight (22 + 6 = 28). I haven't time to light it again (у меня нет времени ее зажечь). Twenty-six and five make thirty-one (26 + 5 = 31). Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one (итого: досл. это делает 501 622 731)."
1. The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. This man was so much occupied that he did not even raise his head at the little prince's arrival.
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out."
"Three and two make five. Five and seven make twelve. Twelve and three make fifteen. Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two. Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight. I haven't time to light it again. Twenty-six and five make thirty-one. Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one."  
 
2. "Five hundred million what (5 миллионов чего)?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there (ты все еще здесь)? Five-hundred-and-one million (501 миллион) - I can't stop (не могу остановиться)... 
I have so much to do (столько нужно сделать: досл. у меня есть так много делать)! I am concerned with matters of consequence (забочусь о делах особой важности). I don't amuse myself with balderdash (не отвлекаюсь на ерунду). Two and five make seven (2 + 5 = 7)..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had (никогда в своей жизни) let go of a question once he had asked it (не оставлял вопрос, однажды заданный). 
The businessman raised his head. 
"During the fifty-four years (54 года) that I have inhabited this planet, I have been disturbed only three times (меня беспокоили (отвлекали) только трижды). The first time was twenty-two years ago (первый раз 22 года назад), when some giddy goose (легкомысленный дурак (или пустоголовая гусыня)) fell from goodness knows where (неизвестно откуда). He made the most frightful noise (он поднял такой ужасный шум) that resounded all over the place (отзвуки которого были везде: досл. который «отзвучивал», «to sound» —  звучать, «to resound» —  звучать повторно), and I made four mistakes in my addition (допустил 4 ошибки в подсчетах). The second time, eleven years ago (11 лет назад), I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism (приступ ревматизма). I don't get enough exercise (мало двигался: досл. не делал достаточно упражнений). I have no time for loafing («ничегонеделания»). The third time (3 раз) — well, this is it (это он и есть)! I was saying, then (я говорил, значит), five-hundred-and-one millions — "
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace (осознал, что ему не будет покоя: досл. нет надежды быть оставленным в покое) until he answered this question (пока не ответит).
"Millions of those little objects (этих маленьких штучек)," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the sky (которые можно увидеть в небе)."
"Flies (мухи)?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects (сверкающие штучки)."
"Bees (пчелы)?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects (маленькие золотые штучки) that set lazy men to idle dreaming (которые располагают ленивых людей к бесполезным мечтаниям). As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars (имеете в виду звезды)?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do (что Вы делаете) with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate (точный)."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them (Ничего. Они мне принадлежат: досл. я ими владею)."
"You own the stars?"
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who — (но я уже видел короля, который —) "
"Kings do not own, they reign over (короли не владеют, они правят). It is a very different matter (разные вещи)."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars (и что хорошего во владении звездами)?"
"It  does me the good of making me rich (то, что я богат: досл. это делает мне хорошо делая меня богатым)."
"And what good does it do you to be rich (быть богатым)?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars (могу купить больше звезд: досл. это делает это возможным для меня купить больше звезд), if any are ever discovered (если какие-либо откроют)."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor tippler (рассуждает, как мой бедный пьяница)..." 
2. "Five hundred million what?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there? Five-hundred-and-one million - I can't stop... 
I have so much to do! I am concerned with matters of consequence. I don't amuse myself with balderdash. Two and five make seven..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question once he had asked it. 
The businessman raised his head. 
"During the fifty-four years that I have inhabited this planet, I have been disturbed only three times. The first time was twenty-two years ago, when some giddy goose fell from goodness knows where. He made the most frightful noise that resounded all over the place, and I made four mistakes in my addition. The second time, eleven years ago, I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism. I don't get enough exercise. I have no time for loafing. The third time - well, this is it! I was saying, then, five -hundred-and-one millions - "
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace until he answered this question.
"Millions of those little objects," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the sky."
"Flies?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects."
"Bees?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects that set lazy men to idle dreaming. As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them."
"You own the stars?"
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who - "
"Kings do not own, they reign over. It is a very different matter."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars?"
"It does me the good of making me rich."
"And what good does it do you to be rich?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars, if any are ever discovered."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor tippler..."
3. Nevertheless (все же), he still had some more questions (у него все еще были вопросы). 
"How is it possible for one to own the stars (как можно владеть звездами: досл. как это возможно для одного)?"
"To whom do they belong (кому они принадлежат)?" the businessman retorted (возразил), peevishly (раздраженно).
"I don't know. To nobody (не знаю. Никому)."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it (потому что я первый об этом полумал)."
"Is that all that is necessary (и это все, что нужно)?"
"Certainly (конечно). When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours (когда ты находишь бриллиант, который никому не принадлежит, — он твой). When you discover an island (открываешь остров) that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea (появляется идея) before any one else (прежде других), you take out a patent on it (получаешь патент): it is yours. So with me (так и я): I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them (никто раньше меня не додумался ими владеть)."
"Yes, that is true (правда)," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them (а что Вы с ними делаете)?"
"I administer them (управляю ими)," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them (считаю и пересчитываю). It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence (заинтересован в делах особой важности)." 
The little prince was still not satisfied (маленькому принцу было мало: досл. все еще не был удовлетворен). 
"If I owned a silk scarf (у меня есть шелковый шарф)," he said, "I could put it around my neck (я завязываю его на шее) and take it away with me (беру с собой). If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with me (вырвать цветок и забрать с собой). But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven (не можете сорвать звезды с небес)..."
"No. But I can put them in the bank (положить в банк)."
"Whatever does that mean (а это что значит)?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper (маленький листик). And then I put this paper in a drawer (ящик) and lock it with a key (запираю на ключ)."
"And that is all (и все?)?"
"That is enough (достаточно)," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining (смешно)," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic (скорее поэтично). But it is of no great consequence." 
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups (дела особой важности маленький принц представлял совсем не так, как взрослые). 
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation (разговор) with the businessman, "which I water (поливаю) every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows (кто его знает)). It is of some use (польза) to my volcanoes , and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them (от того, что я ими владею). But you are of no use to the stars (но звездам нет никакой пользы)..." 
The businessman opened his mouth (открыл рот), but he found nothing to say in answer (не нашел что сказать в ответ). 
And the little prince went away. 
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether (совершенно) extraordinary," he said simply (просто), talking to himself as he continued on his journey (разговаривая сам с собой и продолжая путешествие).
3. Nevertheless, he still had some more questions. 
"How is it possible for one to own the stars?"
"To whom do they belong?" the businessman retorted, peevishly.
"I don't know. To nobody."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it."
"Is that all that is necessary?"
"Certainly. When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you discover an island that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea before any one else, you take out a patent on it: it is yours. So with me: I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them."
"Yes, that is true," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them?"
"I administer them," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them. It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence." 
The little prince was still not satisfied. 
"If I owned a silk scarf," he said, "I could put it around my neck and take it away with me. If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with me. But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven..."
"No. But I can put them in the bank."
"Whatever does that mean?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper. And then I put this paper in a drawer and lock it with a key."
"And that is all?"
"That is enough," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic. But it is of no great consequence." 
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups. 
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation with the businessman, "which I water every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows). It is of some use to my volcanoes , and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them. But you are of no use to the stars..." 
The businessman opened his mouth, but he found nothing to say in answer. 
And the little prince went away. 
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary," he said simply, talking to himself as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 14
1. The fifth (пятая) planet was very strange (странная). It was the smallest of all (наименьшая изо всех). There was just enough room (как раз достаточно места) on it for a street lamp (уличного фонаря) and a lamplighter (фонарщика). The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of (маленький принц не мог объяснить, какая польза от: досл. был не в состоянии достигнуть какого-либо объяснения использования) a street lamp and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens (где-то в небесах), on a planet which had no people (без людей), and not one house (ни единого дома). But he said to himself, nevertheless (все же):
"It may well be (вполне может быть) that this man is absurd (ненормален). But he is not so (но не так) absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler (король, тщеславный человек, бизнесмен и пьяница). For at least his work has some meaning (его труд имеет хоть какой-то смысл). When he lights his street lamp (когда он зажигает фонарь), it is as if he brought one more star to life (он будто дает жизнь еще одной звезде), or one flower. When he puts out (гасит) his lamp, he sends (отправляет) the flower, or the star, to sleep (спать). That is a beautiful occupation (чудесное занятие). And since it is beautiful (поскольку это прекрасно), it is truly useful (это действительно полезно)."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully (почтенно) saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why (почему) have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders (таков порядок (так заведено))," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted (зажег) his lamp again. 
1. The fifth planet was very strange. It was the smallest of all. There was just enough room on it for a street lamp and a lamplighter. The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of a street lamp and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens, on a planet which had no people, and not one house. But he said to himself, nevertheless:
"It may well be that this man is absurd. But he is not so absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler. For at least his work has some meaning. When he lights his street lamp, it is as if he brought one more star to life, or one flower. When he puts out his lamp, he sends the flower, or the star, to sleep. That is a beautiful occupation. And since it is beautiful, it is truly useful."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted his lamp again.
 
2. "But why have you just lighted it again? (почему зажгли снова)"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. 
"I do not understand (не понимаю)," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand (нечего понимать: досл. есть ничего понимать)," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders (порядок — это порядок (ход вещей)). Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead (вытер лоб) with a handkerchief (носовым платком) decorated with red squares (украшенным красными звездами). 
"I follow a terrible profession (у меня ужасная профессия: досл. я следую ужасной профессии). In the old days (в прежние времена: досл. в старые дни) it was reasonable (это было разумно). I put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation (весь остаток дня я отдыхал: досл. имел для отдыха) and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time (ход вещей изменился с тех пор)?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the tragedy (вот в чем беда)! From year to year (из года в год) the planet has turned more rapidly (планета поворачивалась более резко) and the orders have not been changed!"
"Then what (что тогда)?" asked the little prince.
"Then — the planet now makes a complete turn every minute (теперь планета делает полный оборот за 1 минуту), and I no longer have a single second for repose (у меня нет ни единой секунды для отдыха). Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!"
"That is very funny (забавно)! A day lasts (день длится) only one minute, here where you live (здесь, где Вы живете)!"
"It is not funny at all (вовсе)!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking together a month has gone by (пока мы разговаривали, прошел месяц)."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes (30 минут). Thirty days. Good evening."
2. "But why have you just lighted it again?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. 
"I do not understand," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders. Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead with a handkerchief decorated with red squares. 
"I follow a terrible profession. In the old days it was reasonable. I put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the tragedy! From year to year the planet has turned more rapidly and the orders have not been changed!"
"Then what?" asked the little prince.
"Then-- the planet now makes a complete turn every minute, and I no longer have a single second for repose. Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!"
"That is very funny! A day lasts only one minute, here where you live!"
"It is not funny at all!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking together a month has gone by."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes. Thirty days. Good evening."
 3. And he lighted his lamp again. As the little prince watched him (наблюдал за ним), he felt that he loved (он чувствовал, что он любит) this lamplighter who was so faithful (который так верен) to his orders. He remembered the sunsets (он помнил закаты) which he himself had gone to seek (которые он сам отправился искать (к которым стремился)), in other days, merely by pulling up his chair (в основном передвигая стул); and he wanted to help (захотел помочь) his friend. 
"You know (знаете)," he said, "I can tell you a way (могу подсказать: досл. могу сказать путь) you can rest whenever you want to (отдыхать, когда бы Вы ни захотели)..."
"I always (всегда) want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible (это возможно) for a man to be faithful and lazy (ленивым) at the same time (в одно и то же время). 
The little prince went on (продолжил) with his explanation (объяснение):
"Your planet is so small (так мала) that three strides will take you all the way around it (можно обойти в три шага). To be always in the sunshine (находиться в солнечном свете), you need only walk along rather slowly (нужно только идти довольно медленно). When you want to rest, you will walk (будешь идти) - and the day will last as long as you like (день будет длиться столько, сколько ты захочешь)."
"That doesn't do me much good (мне о этого мало проку: досл. это не делает мне много хорошего)," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in life is to sleep (одна вещь, которую я люблю в жизни, это сон)."
"Then you're unlucky (тогда Вам не повезло: досл. ты неудачлив)," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp. 
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey (продолжал дальше свое путешествие), "that man would be scorned by all the others (был бы осмеян другими): by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless (и все же) he is the only one of them all (он единственный из всех их) who does not seem to me ridiculous (кто для меня не смешен). Perhaps that is because (может это потому) he is thinking of something else besides himself (он думает о чем-то еще, кроме себя)." 
He breathed a sigh of regret (вздохнул: досл. выдохнул вздох сожаления), and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend (кого я бы сделал моим другом). But his planet is indeed (в самом деле) too small. There is no room on it for two people (нет места для двоих)..." 
What the little prince did not dare confess (не осмелился сознаться) was that he was sorry most of all to leave this planet (сожалел о том, что покидает эту планету, больше всего), because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets (она освещалась каждый день 1440 закатами)! 
3. And he lighted his lamp again. As the little prince watched him, he felt that he loved this lamplighter who was so faithful to his orders. He remembered the sunsets which he himself had gone to seek, in other days, merely by pulling up his chair; and he wanted to help his friend. 
"You know," he said, "I can tell you a way you can rest whenever you want to..."
"I always want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible for a man to be faithful and lazy at the same time. 
The little prince went on with his explanation:
"Your planet is so small that three strides will take you all the way around it. To be always in the sunshine, you need only walk along rather slowly. When you want to rest, you will walk - and the day will last as long as you like."
"That doesn't do me much good," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in life is to sleep."
"Then you're unlucky," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp. 
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey, "that man would be scorned by all the others: by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless he is the only one of them all who does not seem to me ridiculous. Perhaps that is because he is thinking of something else besides himself." 
He breathed a sigh of regret, and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend. But his planet is indeed too small. There is no room on it for two people..." 
What the little prince did not dare confess was that he was sorry most of all to leave this planet, because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets!

Chapter 15
1. The sixth (шестая) planet was ten times larger than the last one (в десять раз больше предыдущей). It was inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books (многотомные книги).
"Oh, look (посмотри)! Here is an explorer (исследователь)!" he exclaimed to himself (воскликнул сам себе) when he saw the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table (сел на стол) and panted a little (тяжело и часто дышал немного). He had already traveled so much and so far (он у же так много и так далеко прошел (путешествовал))! 
1. The sixth planet was ten times larger than the last one. It was inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books.
"Oh, look! Here is an explorer!" he exclaimed to himself when he saw the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table and panted a little. He had already traveled so much and so far!
 
2. "Where do you come from (откуда ты пришел)?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book (что это за большая книга)?" said the little prince. "What are you doing (что Вы делаете)?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer (кто такой географ)?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar (ученый) who knows the location (знает месторасположение) of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts (морей, рек, городов, гор и пустынь)."
"That is very interesting (это очень интересно)," said the little prince. 
"Here at last (наконец) is a man who has a real profession (человек, у которого настоящая профессия)!" 
And he cast a look around him (оглянулся: досл. бросил взгляд кругом него) at the planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet (наиболее красивая и величественная планета) that he had ever seen (которую он когда-либо видел).
"Your planet is very beautiful (прекрасна)," he said. "Has it any oceans (на ней есть океаны)?"
"I couldn't tell you (не могу сказать)," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed (был разочарован). "Has it any mountains (а горы: досл. имеет она какие-либо горы)?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either (также)."
"But you are a geographer (но Вы же географ)!"
"Exactly (правильно)," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer (но не исследователь). I haven't a single explorer on my planet (нет ни единого исследователя на моей планете). It is not the geographer (это не географ) who goes out to count (кто отправляется считать) the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about (географ слишком важен дабы везде слоняться). He does not leave his desk (не встает из-за стола: досл. не покидает свою парту). But he receives the explorers in his study (он получает исследователей для научной работы). He asks them questions (задает вопросы), and he notes down (записывает) what they recall of their travels (то, что они вспоминают о своих путешествиях). And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting to him (воспоминания кого-то среди них кажутся ему интересными), the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral character (убедиться в моральности исследователя: досл. требует подтверждения морального характера исследователя)."
"Why is that (зачем)?"
"Because an explorer who told lies (который лжет: досл.говорит неправду) would bring disaster on the books of the geographer (принесет несчастья книгам географа). So would an explorer who drank too much (Так может быть, если исследователь пьет)."
"Why is that (почему)?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double (у пьяного в глазах двоится: досл. видит дважды). Then the geographer would note down two mountains (записать две горы) in a place where there was only one (на месте одной)."
"I know some one (знаю одного человека)," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer (был бы плохим исследователем)."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good (моральность подтверждена: досл. моральный характер показывается как хороший), an inquiry is ordered into his discovery (убедиться в истинности его открытия)." 
"One goes to see it (нужно пойти увидеть его)?"
"No. That would be too complicated (было бы слишком сложно). But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs (у исследователя требуют предоставить доказательства). For example, if the discovery in question (открытие под вопросом) is that of a large mountain (это большая гора), one requires that large stones be brought back from it (требуют большой камень с этой горы)."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement (внезапно заволновался).
"But you - you come from far away (ты, ты пришел издалека)! You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me (должен описать планету)!"
And, having opened his big register (открыл свой большой журнал), the geographer sharpened his pencil (заточил свой карандаш). 
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil (факты сначала записывают карандашом). One waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink (ждут подтверждения перед тем, как записать это чернилами). 
2. "Where do you come from?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book?" said the little prince. "What are you doing?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar who knows the location of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts."
"That is very interesting," said the little prince. 
"Here at last is a man who has a real profession!" 
And he cast a look around him at the planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet that he had ever seen.
"Your planet is very beautiful," he said. "Has it any oceans?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed. "Has it any mountains?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either."
"But you are a geographer!"
"Exactly," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer. I haven't a single explorer on my planet. It is not the geographer who goes out to count the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about. He does not leave his desk. But he receives the explorers in his study. He asks them questions, and he notes down what they recall of their travels. And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting to him, the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral character."
"Why is that?"
"Because an explorer who told lies would bring disaster on the books of the geographer. So would an explorer who drank too much."
"Why is that?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double. Then the geographer would note down two mountains in a place where there was only one."
"I know some one," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good, an inquiry is ordered into his discovery." 
"One goes to see it?"
"No. That would be too complicated. But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs. For example, if the discovery in question is that of a large mountain, one requires that large stones be brought back from it."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement.
"But you - you come from far away! You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me!"
And, having opened his big register, the geographer sharpened his pencil. 
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil. One waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink.
3. "Well (ну)?" said the geographer expectantly (в ожидании).
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting (не очень интересно). It is all so small (все очень маленькое). I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows (кто его знает)."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers (мы не записываем цветов)," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet (цветок — это самое красивое на моей планете)!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are ephemeral (эфемерны, недолговечны)."
"What does that mean (что это значит) — 'ephemeral'?" 
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are most concerned with matters of consequence (географии — это книги, которые заняты делами особой важности). They never become old-fashioned (они никогда не устаревают). It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position (очень редко горы меняют месторасположение). It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters (океаны высыхают). We write of eternal things (мы пишем о вечном)."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again (потухший вулкан может «ожить» опять)," the little prince interrupted (прервал). "What does that mean — 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive (потухший он или нет), it comes to the same thing for us (нам все равно: досл. для нас идет как одна и та же вещь)," said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain (для нас важны горы). It does not change (они не меняются)."
"But what does that mean — 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it (не оставлял однажды заданный вопрос).
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance (такой, какой пребывает в опасности быстрого исчезновения).'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is."
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world (у нее только 4 шипа, чтобы защитить себя от мира). And I have left her on my planet, all alone (оставил ее на планете, совсем одну)!" 
That was his first moment of regret (первое сожаление: досл. момент сожаления). But he took courage once more (набрался храбрости еще раз).
"What place would you advise me to visit now (какую планету Вы бы посоветовали мне посетить)?" he asked.
"The planet Earth (планету Земля)," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation (у нее хорошая репутация)."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower (ушел думая о цветке). 
3. "Well?" said the geographer expectantly.
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting. It is all so small. I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are ephemeral."
"What does that mean-- 'ephemeral'?" 
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are most concerned with matters of consequence. They never become old-fashioned. It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position. It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters. We write of eternal things."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again," the little prince interrupted. "What does that mean - 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive, it comes to the same thing for us," said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain. It does not change."
"But what does that mean - 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it.
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance.'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is."
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world. And I have left her on my planet, all alone!" 
That was his first moment of regret. But he took courage once more.
"What place would you advise me to visit now?" he asked.
"The planet Earth," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower.



Chapter 16
1. So then the seventh planet was the Earth (наконец седьмой планетой была Земля).
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet (не просто обычная планета)! One can count (можно подсчитать: досл. один может подсчитать), there 111 kings (королей) (not forgetting, to be sure (не забывая, естественно), the Negro kings among them (короли африканских стран в том числе)), 7000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men - that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups (в общем, около 2 млрд. взрослых). 
1. So then the seventh planet was the Earth.
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet! One can count, there 111 kings (not forgetting, to be sure, the Negro kings among them), 7000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men - that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups.
 
2. To give you an idea of the size of the Earth (чтобы вы представили себе размеры Земли: досл. дать вам идею), I will tell you that before the invention of electricity (я скажу, что до открытия электричества) it was necessary to maintain (необходимо содержать), over the whole of the six continents (по всем 6 континентам), a veritable army (настоящую армию) of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps. 
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle (вблизи это было бы роскошное зрелище: досл. «видимое» из незначительного расстояния, это сделало бы роскошное представление). The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera (движение этой армии было бы упорядочено, как в балете). First would come the turn of the lamplighters (сначала бы шли фонарщики: досл. первая пришла бы очередь) of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight (засветив свои фонари), these would go off to sleep (они пошли бы спать). 
Next (следующие), the lamplighters of China (Китай) and Siberia would enter (вошли бы) for their steps in the dance (танцуя), and then they too would be waved back into the wings (скрылись бы за кулисами). After that (после этого) would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the stage (никогда не ошиблись бы в порядке выхода на сцену). It would be magnificent (удивительно).
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole (и только человек, ответственный за единственный фонарь на Северном полюсе), and his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole - only these two (только эти двое) would live free from toil and care (жили бы без забот: досл. жили бы свободными от тяжелой работы и заботы): they would be busy twice a year (они были бы заняты дважды в год).
2. To give you an idea of the size of the Earth, I will tell you that before the invention of electricity it was necessary to maintain, over the whole of the six continents, a veritable army of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps. 
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle. The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera. First would come the turn of the lamplighters of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight, these would go off to sleep. 
Next, the lamplighters of China and Siberia would enter for their steps in the dance, and then they too would be waved back into the wings. After that would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the stage. It would be magnificent.
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole, and his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole - only these two would live free from toil and care: they would be busy twice a year.  

Chapter 17
1. When one wishes to play the wit (блеснуть остроумием: «wit» — разум), he sometimes wanders a little from the truth (досл. «уходит немного от правды»). I have not been altogether honest (я не был совсем честен) in what I have told you about the lamplighters (в том, что я рассказал вам о фонарщиках). And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it (я осознаю, что могу создать неправильное представление о нашей планете для тех, кто с ней не знаком: досл. «рискую дать фальшивую идею о…»). Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth (люди занимают очень мало места на Земле). If the two billion inhabitants (2 биллиона жителей) who people its surface (заселяют ее поверхность: «people» не только «люди», но и «заселять») were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together (все стали толпой), as they do for some big public assembly (как они то делают на публичных собраниях), they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide (они легко поместились бы на площади 20 миль длиной и 20 шириной). All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet (все человечество могло бы поместиться на маленьком тихоокеанском островке). 
The grown-ups, to be sure (естественно), will not believe you when you tell them that (не поверят, если вы им это скажете). They imagine that they fill a great deal of space (им кажется, что они занимают огромное пространство). They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs (они возомнили себя такими же важными, как и баобабы). You should advise them, then, to make their own calculations (можете предложить им провести свои подсчеты). They adore figures (они обожают цифры), and that will please them (им это понравится). But do not waste your time on this extra task (не тратьте время на это задание). It is unnecessary (это не понадобится). You have, I know, confidence in me (я знаю, что вы мне доверяете).
1. When one wishes to play the wit, he sometimes wanders a little from the truth. I have not been altogether honest in what I have told you about the lamplighters. And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it. Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth. If the two billion inhabitants who people its surface were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together, as they do for some big public assembly, they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide. All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet. 
The grown-ups, to be sure, will not believe you when you tell them that. They imagine that they fill a great deal of space. They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs. You should advise them, then, to make their own calculations. They adore figures, and that will please them. But do not waste your time on this extra task. It is unnecessary. You have, I know, confidence in me. 
2. When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people (был удивлен, не увидев людей). He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet (он уже начинал бояться, что прибыл не на ту планету), when a coil of gold (клубок золота), the colour of the moonlight (цвета лунного сияния), flashed across the sand (вспыхнул на песке).
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously (вежливо).
"Good evening," said the snake (змея).
"What planet is this on which I have come down? (что это за планета (на которую я прилетел)?)" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth (так на Земле нет людей)?"
"This is the desert (пустыня). There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large (большая)," said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone (присел на камень), and raised his eyes toward the sky (поднял в небо глаза). 
"I wonder (интересно)," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us may find his own again (зажигаются ли звезды в небе для того, чтобы однажды один из нас мог отыскать свою опять)... Look at my planet. It is right there above us (прямо над нами). But how far away it is! (но как она далеко)""It is beautiful (прекрасна)," the snake said. "What has brought you here (как тебя сюда занесло: досл. что тебя сюда принесло)?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower (у меня были проблемы с цветком)," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake. 
And they were both silent (оба молчали). 
"Where are the men (где люди)?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again (возобновил разговор). "It is a little lonely in the desert (немного одиноко в пустыне)..."
"It is also lonely among men (среди людей тоже одиноко)," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time (долго смотрел на нее). 
2. When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people. He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet, when a coil of gold, the colour of the moonlight, flashed across the sand.
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously.
"Good evening," said the snake.
"What planet is this on which I have come down?" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth?"
"This is the desert. There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large," said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his eyes toward the sky. 
"I wonder," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us may find his own again... Look at my planet. It is right there above us. But how far away it is!""It is beautiful," the snake said. "What has brought you here?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake. 
And they were both silent. 
"Where are the men?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again. "It is a little lonely in the desert..."
"It is also lonely among men," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time.
 
3."You are a funny animal (забавное животное)," he said at last (наконец-то). "You are no thicker than a finger (не толще пальца)..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king (я более могущественна, чем палец короля)," said the snake. 
The little prince smiled (улыбнулся). 
"You are not very powerful (ты не очень могущественна). You haven't even any feet (у тебя даже ног нет). You cannot even travel (ты даже путешествовать не можешь)..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you (я могу отнести тебя дальше, чем любой корабль)," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle (она обвилась вокруг лодыжки маленького принца), like a golden bracelet. 
"Whomever I touch (к кому бы я ни прикоснулась), I send back to the earth from whence he came (я отправляю его в землю, откуда он и пришел)," the snake spoke again. "But you are innocent (невинен) and true (правдивый), and you come from a star..." 
The little prince made no reply (не ответил).
"You move me to pity (мне тебя жаль: досл. ты двигаешь меня к жалости) - you are so weak (так беспомощен, слаб) on this Earth made of granite," the snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet (если станешь слишком скучать по своей планете). I can - "
"Oh! I understand you very well (понимаю очень хорошо)," said the little prince. "But why do you always speak in riddles (почему ты постоянно говоришь загадками)?"
"I solve them all (я из разгадываю)," said the snake.
And they were both silent. 
3."You are a funny animal," he said at last. "You are no thicker than a finger..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king," said the snake. 
The little prince smiled. 
"You are not very powerful. You haven't even any feet. You cannot even travel..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle, like a golden bracelet. 
"Whomever I touch, I send back to the earth from whence he came," the snake spoke again. "But you are innocent and true, and you come from a star..." 
The little prince made no reply.
"You move me to pity - you are so weak on this Earth made of granite," the snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet. I can - "
"Oh! I understand you very well," said the little prince. "But why do you always speak in riddles?"
"I solve them all," said the snake.
And they were both silent.   
  

Chapter 18
1.The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower (пересек пустыню и встретил только один цветок). 
It was a flower with three petals (это был цветок с тремя лепестками), a flower of no account at all (ничего особенного собой не представляющий). 
1.The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower. 
It was a flower with three petals, a flower of no account at all.
 
2."Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men (а где люди)?" the little prince asked, politely. 
The flower had once seen a caravan passing (цветок однажды видел проходящий мимо караван). 
"Men?" she echoed (люди – отозвался цветок). "I think there are six or seven of them in existence (думаю, шестеро или семеро их существует). I saw them, several years ago (видел их, несколько лет тому назад). But one never knows where to find them (но никто не знает, где их найти). The wind blows them away (ветер их унес). They have no roots (у них нет корней), and that makes their life very difficult (это усложняет им жизнь: досл. это делает их жизнь очень тяжелой)."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower. 
2."Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men?" the little prince asked, politely. 
The flower had once seen a caravan passing. 
"Men?" she echoed. "I think there are six or seven of them in existence. I saw them, several years ago. But one never knows where to find them. The wind blows them away. They have no roots, and that makes their life very difficult."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower.

Chapter 19
1. After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain (после этого маленький принц взобрался на высокую гору). The only mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees (единственными горами, ему известными, были три вулкана, которые доходили ему до колен). And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool (использовал потухший вулкан как скамеечку для ног). "From a mountain as high as this one (с такой высокой горы, как эта)," he said to himself (сказал себе), "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance (я смогу увидеть всю планету одним взглядом), and all the people..."
1. After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain. The only mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees. And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool. "From a mountain as high as this one," he said to himself, "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance, and all the people..."  
 
2. But he saw nothing (ничего не увидел), save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles (из-за горных вершин, острых, как иглы). 
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning - Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you (ты кто)?" said the little prince.
"Who are you - Who are you - Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone (будь моим другом, я так одинок)," he said.
"I am all alone - all alone - all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet (странная планета)!" he thought (подумал). 
"It is altogether dry (она и сухая), and altogether pointed (и остроконечная), and altogether harsh and forbidding (и суровая и пугающая одновременно). And the people have no imagination (и людей никакого воображения). They repeat whatever one says to them (они повторяют все, что им ни скажи)... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak (она всегда говорила первая)..." 
2. But he saw nothing, save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles. 
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning - Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you?" said the little prince.
"Who are you - Who are you - Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone," he said.
"I am all alone - all alone - all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet!" he thought. 
"It is altogether dry, and altogether pointed, and altogether harsh and forbidding. And the people have no imagination. They repeat whatever one says to them... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak..."

Chapter 20
1. But it happened (но случилось так) that after walking for a long time (после долгого хождения) through sand, and rocks, and snow (по песках, камнях, снегах: досл. сквозь пески…), the little prince at last (наконец) came upon a road (дорога). And all roads lead to the abodes (жилище) of men.
"Good morning," he said. 
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses (сад, весь в цветущих розах).
"Good morning," said the roses. 
The little prince gazed (пристально поглядел, «уставился») at them. They all looked like (похожи на) his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck (требовал, пораженный).
"We are roses," the roses said. 
And he was overcome with sadness (его одолела грусть). His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind (единственная такая) in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them (их было здесь пять тысяч), all alike (все одинаковые), in one single garden (в одном единственном саду)! 
1. But it happened that after walking for a long time through sand, and rocks, and snow, the little prince at last came upon a road. And all roads lead to the abodes of men.
"Good morning," he said. 
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses.
"Good morning," said the roses. 
The little prince gazed at them. They all looked like his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck.
"We are roses," the roses said. 
And he was overcome with sadness. His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them, all alike, in one single garden!
 
2. "She would be very much annoyed (она была бы очень раздосадована)," he said to himself, "if she should see that (увидь она это)... she would cough most dreadfully (кашляла бы еще ужаснее), and she would pretend that she was dying (притворялась бы, что умирает), to avoid being laughed at (чтобы избежать насмешки). And I should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life (а я притворялся бы, что ухаживаю за ней, спасая ее: досл. ухаживал бы ее назад к жизни) - for if I did not do that, to humble (смириться) myself also, she would really allow herself to die (позволит себе умереть)..." 
Then he went on with his reflections (продолжал размышлять): 
"I thought that I was rich (мне казалось, я богат), with a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose (все, что у меня было — это обычная роза). A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees (три вулкана, мне по колени)- and one of them perhaps (возможно) extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince (не такой уж я великий принц: досл. это не делает меня очень большим принцем)..." 
And he lay down in the grass and cried (лег на траву и заплакал). 
2. "She would be very much annoyed," he said to himself, "if she should see that... she would cough most dreadfully, and she would pretend that she was dying, to avoid being laughed at. And I should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life - for if I did not do that, to humble myself also, she would really allow herself to die..." 
Then he went on with his reflections: 
"I thought that I was rich, with a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose. A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees - and one of them perhaps extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince..." 
And he lay down in the grass and cried. 

Chapter 21
1. It was then that the fox appeared (потом появилась лиса: досл. это было потом, что лиса появилась).
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw nothing (несмотря на то, что никого вокруг не видел: досл. когда он оборачивался по кругу он видел ничего).
"I am right here (я прямо здесь)," the voice (голос) said, "under the apple tree (под яблоней)."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added (добавил), "You are very pretty to look at (ты хорошенький(ая): досл. ты очень миленький смотреть на)." 
1. It was then that the fox appeared.
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw nothing.
"I am right here," the voice said, "under the apple tree."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added, "You are very pretty to look at." 
 
2. "I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me (поиграй со мной: досл. подойди и поиграй со мной)," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy (несчастен)."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed (меня не приручили)."
"Ah! Please excuse me (извини)," said the little prince. 
But, after some thought (немного подумав: досл. после нескольких мыслей), he added:
"What does that mean (что это значит) - 'tame'?"
"You do not live here (ты здесь не живешь)," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for (что ты ищешь: досл. что это есть, что ты ищешь)?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns (ружья, пистолеты), and they hunt (охотятся). It is very disturbing (очень беспокоит). They also raise chickens (разводят цыплят). These are their only interests (это их единственное занятие (интерес)). Are you looking for chickens (ищешь цыплят)?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends (ищу друзей). What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected (это действие, которое часто игнорируют)," said the fox. It means to establish ties (установить связи)."
"'To establish ties'?"
"Just that (именно)," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more (для меня ты все еще ничего больше) than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys (как маленький мальчик, точно такой же, как и тысячи других). And I have no need of you (ты мне не нужен: досл. у меня неь необходимости тебя). And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other (мы будем друг другу нужны). To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand (начинаю понимать)," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things (на земле всякое бывает: досл. кто-то может увидеть всякие виды вещей)."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince. 
The fox seemed perplexed (озадаченной), and very curious (заинтересованной).
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters (охотники) on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect (ничто не совершенно)," sighed the fox.
2. "I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed."
"Ah! Please excuse me," said the little prince. 
But, after some thought, he added:
"What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"You do not live here," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns, and they hunt. It is very disturbing. They also raise chickens. These are their only interests. Are you looking for chickens?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends. What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected," said the fox. It means to establish ties."
"'To establish ties'?"
"Just that," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys. And I have no need of you. And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince. 
The fox seemed perplexed, and very curious.
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect," sighed the fox.  
 
3. But he came back to his idea (он вернулся к своей мысли). 
"My life is very monotonous (однообразна)," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike (все цыплята одинаковы), and all the men are just alike. And, in consequence (в результате), I am a little bored (мне немного скучно). But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun came to shine on my life (все равно, что солнце озарит мою жизнь: досл. солнце придет осветить). I shall know the sound of a step (буду знать звук шагов) that will be different from all the others (которые будут отличаться от всех остальных). Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground (будут заставлять меня прятаться: досл. отошлют меня спешить обратно под землю). Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow (твои же будут звучать для меня, как музыка за пределами моей норы). And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder (видишь хлебные поля вон там внизу)? I do not eat bread (хлеб). Wheat is of no use to me (мне пшеница не нужна: досл. от пшеницы мне никакой пользы). The wheat fields have nothing to say to me (ни о чем мне не говорят). And that is sad (печально). But you have hair that is the colour of gold (золотистые волосы). Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you (будет напоминать о тебе: досл. будет приносить меня назад к мыслям о тебе). And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat (я полюблю слушать ветер в пшенице)..." 
The fox gazed (пристально смотреть) at the little prince, for a long time. 
"Please - tame me!" he said.
"I want to (я хочу), very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time (у меня мало времени). I have friends to discover (найти друзей: досл. открыть друзей (как открыть новый остров)), and a great many things to understand (много понять)."
"One only understands the things that one tames (мы понимаем только то, что приручили)," said the fox. "Men have no more time to understand anything (у людей нет времени что-либо понимать). They buy things all ready made at the shops (покупают готовое в магазине). But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship (нет такого магазина, в котором можно купить дружбу), and so men have no friends any more (потому у людей больше нет друзей). If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient (терпеливый)," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little distance from me - like that - in the grass (сначала сядешь недалеко от меня — как сейчас — на траве). I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye (буду поглядывать: досл. смотреть уголками глаз), and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings (слова приводят к непониманию: досл. слова — источник непонимания). But you will sit a little closer (немного ближе) to me, every day..." 
The next day the little prince came back (вернулся). 
"It would have been better (было бы лучше) to come back at the same hour (возвращаться в одно и то же время)," said the fox. 
"If, for example (например), you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy (тогда в три часа я уже буду счастливым). I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances (буду счастливее и счастливее, когда будет приближаться время). At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying (уже буду волноваться) and jumping about («прыгать от нетерпения»). I shall show you how happy I am (покажу, как я счастлив)! But if you come at just any time (в разное время), I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you (в котором часу мое сердце будет готово приветствовать тебя)... One must observe the proper rites (нужно соблюдать должную церемонию)..."
"What is a rite (церемония)?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected (это тоже действие, которое часто игнорируется)," said the fox. "They are what make one day different from other days (то, что делает один день не таким, как другой), one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far as the vineyards (могу добраться до винного двора). But if the hunters danced at just any time (если будут танцевать в разное время), every day would be like every other day (каждый день будет такой, как и другие), and I should never have any vacation (отдых, каникулы) at all." 
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near (пришло время отбытия) - "Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry (заплачу)."
"It is your own fault (твоя собственная вина)," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of harm (я не желал тебе зла: досл. никогда не хотел какого-либо вида вреда); but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry (почти плачешь: досл. собираешься плакать)!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all (это не принесло тебе ничего хорошего)!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the colour of the wheat fields (хотя бы цвет пшеничного поля)." And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses (посмотри на розы). You will understand now that yours is unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret (секретный подарок)." 
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. 
"You are not at all like my rose (вы не такие, как моя роза)," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew him (как моя лиса, когда я ее впервые увидел). He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world." 
And the roses were very much embarrassed (смутились). 
"You are beautiful, but you are empty (пусты)," he went on. "One could not die for you (ради вас никто не умрет). To be sure, an ordinary passerby (обычный прохожий) would think that my rose looked just like you - the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone (сама по себе) she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered (ее я поливал); because it is she that I have put under the glass globe (ее помещал под стеклянный колпак); because it is she that I have sheltered behind the screen (прикрывал ширмой); because it is for her (для нее) that I have killed (уничтожил) the caterpillars (гусениц) (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies (за исключением двух или трех, которых мы сохранили, дабы они стали бабочками)); because it is she that I have listened to (ее я слушал), when she grumbled (ворчала), or boasted (хвасталась), or even sometimes when she said nothing (а иногда ничего не говорила). 
Because she is my rose.
3. But he came back to his idea. 
"My life is very monotonous," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike, and all the men are just alike. And, in consequence, I am a little bored. But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun came to shine on my life . I shall know the sound of a step that will be different from all the others. Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground. Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow. And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder? I do not eat bread. Wheat is of no use to me. The wheat fields have nothing to say to me. And that is sad. But you have hair that is the colour of gold. Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you. And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat..." 
The fox gazed at the little prince, for a long time. 
"Please - tame me!" he said.
"I want to, very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time. I have friends to discover, and a great many things to understand."
"One only understands the things that one tames," said the fox. "Men have no more time to understand anything. They buy things all ready made at the shops. But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship, and so men have no friends any more. If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little distance from me - like that - in the grass. I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye, and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings. But you will sit a little closer to me, every day..." 
The next day the little prince came back. 
"It would have been better to come back at the same hour," said the fox. 
"If, for example, you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy. I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances. At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying and jumping about. I shall show you how happy I am! But if you come at just any time, I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you... One must observe the proper rites..."
"What is a rite?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected," said the fox. "They are what make one day different from other days, one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far as the vineyards. But if the hunters danced at just any time, every day would be like every other day, and I should never have any vacation at all." 
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near - "Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry."
"It is your own fault," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of harm; but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the color of the wheat fields." And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses. You will understand now that yours is unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret." 
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. 
"You are not at all like my rose," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew him. He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world." 
And the roses were very much embarrassed. 
"You are beautiful, but you are empty," he went on. "One could not die for you. To be sure, an ordinary passerby would think that my rose looked just like you - the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered; because it is she that I have put under the glass globe; because it is she that I have sheltered behind the screen; because it is for her that I have killed the caterpillars (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies); because it is she that I have listened to, when she grumbled, or boasted, or even sometimes when she said nothing. 
Because she is my rose.  
 
And he went back to meet the fox.
"Goodbye," he said.
"Goodbye," said the fox. "And now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye."
"What is essential is invisible to the eye," the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. "It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so important."
"It is the time I have wasted for my rose - " said the little prince, so that he would be sure to remember.
"Men have forgotten this truth," said the fox. "But you must not forget it. You become responsible, forever, for what you have tamed. You are responsible for your rose..." 
"I am responsible for my rose," the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. 

Текст адаптирует Юлия Федорчук sono_io@inbox.ru 

Chapter 1
1. Once when I was six years old (когда-то, когда мне было шесть лет: досл. Я был шесть лет стар; «be – was, were – been» – быть) I saw a magnificent picture in a book (я видел замечательную картинку в книжке: «see – saw – seen» – видеть), called True Stories from Nature (называемой Правдивые Истории из Природы: «саll – called» – звать, называть, «from» – из), about the primeval forest (о древних лесах). It was a picture of a boa constrictor (это была картинка удава) in the act of swallowing an animal (глотающего животное: досл. в процессе глотания животного). Here is a copy of the drawing (это копия рисунка: досл. здесь есть копия; «here» – здесь).
 

1. Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing.
2. In the book it said (в книге говорилось: досл. это сказано; «say – said» – говорить): "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it (удавы глотают свою добычу целиком, не пережевывая: досл. без жевания её). After that they are not able to move (после этого они не в состоянии двигаться), and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion (и они спят в течение 6 месяцев, в которых они нуждаются для переваривания пищи: «through» – сквозь, «need» – нуждаться, сравни «to be in need of» – нуждаться в чем-то)." I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle (я задумался глубоко тогда над приключениями в джунглях: «ponder» – обдумывать). And after some work with a colored pencil (и поработав цветным каранлашем: досл. и после некоторой работы с цветным карандашем) I succeeded in making my first drawing (я нарисовал мой первый рисунок: досл. я преуспел в изготовлении; «make» – делать, «draw – drew – drawn» – рисовать, «drawing» – рисунок). My Drawing Number One (Номер Один). It looked like this (он выглядел так: досл. он выглядел, как это): 
 
2. In the book it said: "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it. After that they are not able to move, and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion." I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. And after some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing. My Drawing Number One. It looked like this:
3. I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups (я показал свое творение взрослым: «show – showed» – показывать), and asked them whether the drawing frightened them (и спросил у них, не пугает ли рисунок их). But they answered (ответили): "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat? (пугает? почему шляпа должна пугать: досл. почему должен кто-то один быть напуганным шляпой)". My drawing was not a picture of a hat (мой рисунок не был изображением шляпы). It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant (слон). But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it (но поскольку взрослые не были способны это понять: «since» – с тех пор), I made another drawing (я сделал другой рисунок): I drew the inside of the boa constrictor (удава изнутри: «inside» – то, что внутри), so that the grown-ups could see it clearly (так, чтобы взрослые могли видеть это ясно). They always need to have things explained (им всегда нужно объяснять: досл. они всегда нуждаются в том, чтобы вещи были объяснены; «explain – explained» – объяснять). My Drawing Number Two looked like this: 
 
3. I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the drawing frightened them. But they answered: "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat?" 
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant. But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it, I made another drawing: I drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the grown-ups could see it clearly. They always need to have things explained. My Drawing Number Two looked like this:
4. The grown-ups' response, this time (ответом взрослых на этот раз: досл. это время), was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors (был совет оставить мое рисование удавов: досл. было посоветовать мне отложить в сторону мое рисование удавов), whether from the inside or the outside (снаружи), and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar (и посвятить себя вместо этого географии, истории, арифметике и грамматике). That is why (вот почему), at the age of six (в возрасте 6 лет), I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter (я отказался от того, что могло бы быть замечательной карьерой художника: «give – gave – given» – давать, «give up» – отказываться). I had been disheartened by the failure (я огорчился провалом) of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves (сами), and it is tiresome for children (это (есть) утомительно для детей) to be always and forever explaining things to them (всегда и постоянно объяснять вещи для них: «always» – всегда, «forever» – навсегда). 
4. The grown-ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the outside, and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar. That is why, at the age of six, I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter. I had been disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves, and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
5. So then (поэтому) I chose another profession (я выбрал другую профессию: «choose – chose – chosen» – выбирать), and learned to pilot airplanes (и научился управлять самолётом: «learn – learned» – учиться). I have flown a little over all parts of the world (я летал понемногу над всеми частями мира: «a little» – немножко; «fly – flew – flown» – летать); and it is true (правда) that geography has been very useful to me (была очень полезна для меня: «useful» – полный полезности). At a glance (едва взглянув: «glance» – мимолётный взгляд) I can distinguish China from Arizona (я мог отличить Китай от Аризоны). If one gets lost in the night (если потеряешься ночью: досл. если один (кто-то) получит потерю ночью), such knowledge is valuable (такое знание очень ценно). 
In the course of this life (в течение моей жизни: «course» – направление, ход, курс) I have had a great many encounters with a great many people (я имел очень много встреч с очень многими людьми) who have been concerned with matters of consequence (которые заботились о последствиях). I have lived a great deal among grown-ups (я необычайно долго жил среди взрослых: «a great deal» – необычайно много). I have seen them intimately, close at hand (я видел их вблизи (близко), рядом под рукой). And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them (и это не улучшило моё мнение о них). 
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted (когда бы я не встречал одного из них, который казался мне в общем здравомыслящим: «at all» – в общем, «clear-sighted» – «чистовидящий»), I tried the experiment (я пробовал эксперимент) of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept (который всегда при мне: досл. который я всегда держал). I would try to find out (я пытался выяснить: «to find out» – выяснить), so, if this was a person of true understanding (была ли эта личность действительно понимающая: досл. личность правильного понимания). But, whoever it was (но кто бы это ни был), he, or she, would always say (он или она всегда говорили): "That is a hat (это шляпа)." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars (после этого я никогда не говорил с этим человеком об удавах, древних лесах, или звёздах). I would bring myself down to his level (я опускался до их уровня: досл. приносил себя вниз к их уровню). I would talk to him about bridge (бридж), and golf (гольф), and politics (политику), and neckties (галстуки). And the grown-up would be greatly pleased (очень довольны) to have met such a sensible man (что встретили такого понимающего человека: «meet – met» – встретить, «sensible» – чувствительный).
5. So then I chose another profession, and learned to pilot airplanes. I have flown a little over all parts of the world; and it is true that geography has been very useful to me. At a glance I can distinguish China from Arizona. If one gets lost in the night, such knowledge is valuable. 
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a great many people who have been concerned with matters of consequence. I have lived a great deal among grown-ups. I have seen them intimately, close at hand. And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them. 
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted, I tried the experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept. I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true understanding. But, whoever it was, he, or she, would always say: "That is a hat." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars. I would bring myself down to his level. I would talk to him about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties. And the grown-up would be greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man. 

Chapter 2
1. So I lived my life alone (так я и жил мою жизнь один: «live – lived» – жить), without anyone that I could really talk to (без кого-то, с кем я действительно мог поговорить: «can – could» – мочь, «talked to» – говорить с кем-то), until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago (пока не потерпел крушение в Сахаре, шесть лет назад: досл. пока не имел аварию с моим самолётом в Пустыне Сахара). Something  was broken in my engine (что-то поломалось в моём двигателе: «brake – broke – broken» – биться, ломаться, «some + thing» – какая-то вещь = что-то). And as (поскольку) I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers (ни механика, ни пассажиров: «neither… nor» – ни… ни), I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone (я взялся за ремонт сам: досл. я взял себя попытаться (устранить) тяжёлый ремонт весь (совсем) один; «set to» – взяться (за работу)). It was a question of life or death (вопрос жизни и смерти) for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week (я имел едва ли достаточно питьевой воды до конца недели). 
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand (первую ночь, тогда, я пошёл спать на песке), a thousand miles from any human habitation (за тысячу миль от какого-либо человеческого поселения: «to habituate» – обитать). I was more isolated (я был более изолирован) than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean (чем потерпевший крушение моряк на плоту посреди океана: «shipwrecked» = «ship»+«wrecked»= «корабль»+ «повреждённый», «raft» – плот). Thus (поэтому) you can imagine (представить) my amazement (изумление), at sunrise (на заре: «sunrise»= «sun»+ «rise» = «солнце»+ «вставать, подниматься»), when I was awakened by an odd little voice (когда я был разбужен странным голоском: «little voice» – маленький голос). It said (сказал):
"If you please - draw me a sheep! (будь так добр – нарисуй мне ягнёнка)"
"What! (Что?)"
"Draw me a sheep!" 
I jumped to my feet (я вскочил: досл. прыгнул на мои ноги), completely thunderstruck (совершенно ошарашенный: «thunderstruck» = «thunder»+ «struck» – «молния» + «удар»). I blinked my eyes hard (усиленно замигал: досл. я мигал моими глазами тяжело). I looked carefully all around me (тщательно огляделся: досл. смотрел кругом меня). And I saw a most extraordinary small person (и я увидел чрезвычайно необычного человечка: досл. маленькую персону), who stood there examining me (стоял изучая меня) with great seriousness (серьёзностью). Here you may see (вы можете видеть) the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him (который я позже смог нарисовать с него). But my drawing is certainly (конечно) very much less charming (намного меньше элегантный) than its model. 
 

1. So I lived my life alone, without anyone that I could really talk to, until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago. Something was broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers, I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone. It was a question of life or death for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week. 
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a thousand miles from any human habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement, at sunrise, when I was awakened by an odd little voice. It said:
"If you please - draw me a sheep!"
"What!"
"Draw me a sheep!" 
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I looked carefully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small person, who stood there examining me with great seriousness. Here you may see the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him. But my drawing is certainly very much less charming than its model. 
2. That, however, is not my fault (это, все же, не моя вина). The grown-ups discouraged (здесь: разуверили) me in my painter's career (карьере художника) when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything (и никогда не учился рисовать что-либо), except (кроме) boas from the outside and boas from the inside. 
Now I stared (пристально смотрел) at this sudden apparition (внезапное видение) with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment (с глазами на выкате от удивления: досл. с глазами прямо начинающими из моей головы). Remember (помните), I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region (я разбился в пустыне, за тысячи миль от какого-либо заселённого региона). And yet (и все же) my little man seemed (казался) neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands (ни блуждающим неуверенно среди песков), nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear (ни теряющим сознание от усталости или голода или жажды или страха). Nothing about him (ничто в нём: досл. о нём) gave any suggestion (давало какие-либо подозрения) of a child lost (ребёнок потерялся) in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last (когда наконец-то) I was able to speak (говорить), I said to him (ему): 
"But – what are you doing here? (но – что ты здесь делаешь)" 
And in answer he repeated (в ответ он повторил: «repeat – repeated» – повторять), very slowly (медленно), as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence (так как если бы он говорил о деле большой важности): 
"If you please – draw me a sheep..." 
When a mystery (загадка, тайна) is too overpowering (пересиливающая, подавляющая), one dare not disobey (никто не посмеет не подчиниться: досл. один (кто-то) не посмеет). Absurd as it might seem to me (глупо, как это могло мне казаться), a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death (в опасности смерти), I took out (вынул) of my pocket (карман) a sheet of paper (лист бумаги) and my fountain-pen (авторучку). But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated (как мои занятия были сосредоточены) on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (пареньку: досл. маленькому парню, «chap» – трещина, но разг. «парень») (a little crossly (сердитый), too) that I did not know how to draw (как рисовать). He answered me: "That doesn't matter (это неважно). Draw me a sheep..." 
But I had never (никогда) drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures (одну из двух) I had drawn so often (так часто). It was that (это была та) of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded (поражён) to hear the little fellow (парень) greet it with (приветствовал её с),
"No, no, no! I do not want (я не хочу) an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature (очень опасное создание), and an elephant is very cumbersome (громоздкий). Where I live (где я живу), everything (все: «everything» = «every» + «thing»= «все»+ «вещь») is very small. What I need is a sheep (что мне нужно, так это ягнёнок: досл. что мне нужно есть ягнёнок). Draw me a sheep." 
So then I made a drawing (и вот я нарисовал: досл. сделал рисунок). 
2. That, however, is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged me in my painter's career when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything, except boas from the outside and boas from the inside. 
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment. Remember, I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands, nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear. Nothing about him gave any suggestion of a child lost in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last I was able to speak, I said to him: 
"But - what are you doing here?" 
And in answer he repeated, very slowly, as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence: 
"If you please -- draw me a sheep..." 
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. Absurd as it might seem to me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death, I took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and my fountain-pen. But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (a little crossly, too) that I did not know how to draw. He answered me: "That doesn't matter. Draw me a sheep..." 
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures I had drawn so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded to hear the little fellow greet it with,
"No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature, and an elephant is very cumbersome. Where I live, everything is very small. What I need is a sheep. Draw me a sheep." 
So then I made a drawing. 
 
3. He looked at it carefully (посмотрел пристально), then he said:
"No. This sheep is already (уже) very sickly (болезненный). Make me another (другой)." 
So I made another drawing. 

3. He looked at it carefully, then he said:
"No. This sheep is already very sickly. Make me another." 
So I made another drawing.
 
4. My friend smiled gently and indulgently (мой друг улыбнулся мягко и неопределённо).
"You see yourself, (ты видишь сам)" he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram (баран). It has horns (у него рога)." 
So then I did my drawing over once more (ещё раз). 

4. My friend smiled gently and indulgently.
"You see yourself," he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram. It has horns." 
So then I did my drawing over once more. 

 
4. But it was rejected (отвергнут) too, just like the others (точно так же, как и другие). 
"This one is too old (этот слишком стар). I want a sheep that will live a long time (будет жить долгое время)." 
By this time (на этот раз: досл. тем временем) my patience was exhausted (моё терпение истощилось), because I was in a hurry (спешил: досл. был в спешке) to start taking my engine apart (демонтировать двигатель). So I tossed off («toss» – «подбрасывать») this drawing. And I threw out an explanation with it (и выбросил объяснение с ним). 
"This is only his box (только его коробка). The sheep you asked for is inside (ягнёнок, о котором ты просил, внутри: «to ask for» – «просить о чем-либо»)."

4. But it was rejected too, just like the others. 
"This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a long time." 
By this time my patience was exhausted, because I was in a hurry to start taking my engine apart. So I tossed off this drawing. And I threw out an explanation with it. 
"This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is inside." 
 
 
5. I was very surprised (удивлён) to see a light break over the face (как свет озарил лицо: досл. свет пробился на лицо) of my young judge (юного судьи): 
"That is exactly the way I wanted it (он именно такой, как я хотел: досл. это точно такой путь, как я его хотел)! Do you think (думаешь) that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass (этому ягнёнку нужно будет большое количество травы)?"
"Why (почему)?" 
"Because where I live everything is very small... (потому что, где я живу, всё очень маленькое)" 
"There (там) will surely (наверняка) be enough (достаточно) grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you (я нарисовал очень маленького ягнёнка: досл. это очень маленький ягнёнок, что я дал тебе)." 
He bent (наклонил) his head (голову) over the drawing:
"Not so small that – Look (не такой уж и маленький – посмотри)! He has gone to sleep... (он ушёл спать)"
And that is how (и вот так) I made the acquaintance (познакомился: досл. сделал знакомство) of the little prince. 
5. I was very surprised to see a light break over the face of my young judge: 
"That is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass?"
"Why?" 
"Because where I live everything is very small..." 
"There will surely be enough grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you." 
He bent his head over the drawing:
"Not so small that - Look! He has gone to sleep..."
And that is how I made the acquaintance of the little prince.

Chapter 3
1. It took me a long time (забрало у меня много времени) to learn where he came from (откуда он). The little prince, who asked me so many questions (который много спрашивал: досл. спрашивал много вопросов), never seemed to hear (никогда казалось слышал: в отличие о русского, в английском нет двойного возражения, сравни: он никогда не слышал) the ones I asked him (те, которые задавал я: «ones» – означает «questions», оно заменяет их в предложении, дабы не было тавтологии). It was from words dropped by chance that (это было со слов, брошенных случайно: «to drop – dropped» – падать, бросать, капля; «by chance» – «случайно»), little by little (понемножку), everything was revealed to me (всё было обнаружено мне: «reveal – revealed» – «обнаруживать»).
The first time (когда впервые: досл. первое время) he saw my airplane (самолёт), for instance (например) (I shall not draw (не буду рисовать) my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me (это было бы слишком сложно для меня)), he asked me:
"What is that object (объект, штуковина)?"
"That is not an object. It flies (он летает). It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly (и я гордился тем, что могу его научить, что я могу летать: «to be proud» – гордиться, быть гордым). He cried out (выкрикнул, воскликнул), then (тогда):
"What (как)! You dropped down from the sky (ты упал с небес: досл. упал вниз)?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly (ответил скромно: «modest» – скромный).
"Oh! That is funny! (как забавно: досл. это есть забавно)"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter (рассмеялся: досл. разбился в чудный (красивый) раскат смеха), which irritated (разозлил: «to irritate – irritated» – злить, раздражать) me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously (мне нравится, когда к моим несчастьям относятся серьёзно: досл. мои несчастья берутся серьёзно: «misfortune» – отсутствие счастья).
Then he added (добавил: «to add – added» – добавить, дополнить):
"So you, too, come from the sky (так ты тоже пришёл с неба)! Which is your planet? (с какой планеты: досл. которая есть твоя планета)"
At that moment (в тот момент) I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence (пролился свет на непостижимую тайну его присутствия: досл. я поймал проблеск света в непроницаемой тайне); and I demanded (потребовал: «to demand – demanded» – требовать), abruptly (резко):
"Do you come from another planet (другой планеты)?"
But he did not reply (но он не ответил). He tossed (наклонил) his head gently (мягко, осторожно), without taking his eyes from my plane (не отрывая глаз от моего самолёта: досл. без «забирания» его глаз):
"It is true (действительно: досл. это есть правда) that on that you can't have come from very far away... (что на этом ты не мог прийти из далека)"
And he sank into a reverie (задумался: досл. погрузился в мечтательность), which lasted a long time (которая продолжалась долгое время). Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket (вытянув моего ягнёнка из его (т. е. своего) кармана), he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure (он погрузился в созерцание своего сокровища: досл. спрятал, закопал себя в созерцание).
You can imagine (вы можете представить) how my curiosity was aroused (любопытство возросло) by this half-confidence about the "other planets"(этим полупризнанием о «других планетах»). I made a great effort (я попытался: досл. сделал большое усилие), therefore (следовательно), to find out more on this subject (узнать побольше по этому поводу: «to find out» – узнать, выяснить). "My little man, where do you come from (откуда ты: досл. откуда ты пришёл)? What is this 'where I live,' (что это за «где я живу») of which you speak (о котором ты говоришь)? Where do you want to take your sheep (куда ты хочешь забрать своего ягнёнка)?"
After a reflective silence (гулкой тишины: досл. отражающей тишины) he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me (что хорошо в коробке, которую ты мне дал: досл. вещь, которая так хороша, о коробке, которую ты дал мне) is that at night he can use it as his house (так это то, что ночью он сможет использовать её как свой дом)."
"That is so (это так). And if you are good (если ты добрый) I will give you a string (я дам тебе тесьму (верёвку)), too, so that you can tie him during the day (сможешь привязывать его на протяжение дня: «to tie – tied» – связывать), and a post (здесь: колышек, но имеет также  значения «сообщение», «посылать») to tie him to (к которому его привязать)."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer (казалось был шокирован этим предложением):
"Tie him (привязывать его)! What a queer idea (что за странная идея)!"
"But if you don't tie him (если ты его не привяжешь)," I said, "he will wander off somewhere (зайдёт куда-то: «to wander – wandered» – бродить), and get lost (потеряется: досл. получит потерю)."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter (ещё раз рассмеялся):
"But where do you think he would go? (но куда, по твоему мнению, он мог бы пойти)"
"Anywhere (куда угодно: «anywhere»= «any+where» = «любой»+ «где»). Straight ahead of him (прямо перед собой)."
Then the little prince said, earnestly (серьёзно):
"That doesn't matter (это неважно). Where I live, everything is so small (где я живу, всё очень маленькое)!
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness (немножко печально: досл. с возможно намёком на печаль), he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far... (идя прямо, никто не зайдёт далеко)"

1. It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince, who asked me so many questions, never seemed to hear the ones I asked him. It was from words dropped by chance that, little by little, everything was revealed to me.
The first time he saw my airplane, for instance (I shall not draw my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me), he asked me:
"What is that object?"
"That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly. He cried out, then:
"What! You dropped down from the sky?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly.
"Oh! That is funny!"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter, which irritated me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously.
Then he added:
"So you, too, come from the sky! Which is your planet?"
At that moment I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence; and I demanded, abruptly:
"Do you come from another planet?"
But he did not reply. He tossed his head gently, without taking his eyes from my plane:
"It is true that on that you can't have come from very far away..."
And he sank into a reverie, which lasted a long time. Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket, he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure.
You can imagine how my curiosity was aroused by this half-confidence about the "other planets." I made a great effort, therefore, to find out more on this subject. "My little man, where do you come from? What is this 'where I live,' of which you speak? Where do you want to take your sheep?"
After a reflective silence he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me is that at night he can use it as his house."
"That is so. And if you are good I will give you a string, too, so that you can tie him during the day, and a post to tie him to."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer:
"Tie him! What a queer idea!"
"But if you don't tie him," I said, "he will wander off somewhere, and get lost."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter:
"But where do you think he would go?"
"Anywhere. Straight ahead of him."
Then the little prince said, earnestly:
"That doesn't matter. Where I live, everything is so small!
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness, he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far..." 
 
 

Chapter 4
1. I had thus (таким образом) learned a second (второй) fact of great importance (факт большой важности): this was that (это было то) the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house (едва ли больше за дом)! 
But that did not really (вправду) surprise (удивило) me much. I knew very well (знал очень хорошо: «to know – knew» – знать) that in addition (в дополнение) to the great (больших) planets – such as (таких как) the Earth (Земля), Jupiter, Mars, Venus (Венера) – to which we have given names (которым были даны имена), there are (есть: досл. там есть) also hundreds of others (также сотни других), some of which (некоторые из которых) are so small that one has a hard time seeing them (что их тяжело увидеть: досл. один имеет тяжёлое время видя их) through (сквозь, через) the telescope. When an astronomer discovers (когда астрономы открывают: «to discover» – открывать в значении «делать открытие») one of these (одну из них) he does not give it a name, but only a number (но только номер). He might call it (он может назвать её), for example (для примера), "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason (у меня были серьёзные основания) to believe (верить) that the planet from which the little prince came (из которой пришёл маленький принц) is the asteroid known as (известный как) B-61. 
This asteroid has only once been seen (только раз был увиден) through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer (это был турецкий астроном), in 1909. 
1. I had thus learned a second fact of great importance: this was that the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house! 
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in addition to the great planets –such as the Earth, Jupiter, Mars, Venus – to which we have given names, there are also hundreds of others, some of which are so small that one has a hard time seeing them through the telescope. When an astronomer discovers one of these he does not give it a name, but only a number. He might call it, for example, "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason to believe that the planet from which the little prince came is the asteroid known as B-61. 
This asteroid has only once been seen through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer, in 1909.
 
2. On making his discovery (сделав открытие), the astronomer had presented it (представил его) to the International Astronomical Congress (Международному Астрономическому Конгрессу), in a great demonstration (с особой пышностью: досл. в большой демонстрации). But he was in Turkish costume (в турецком костюме), and so nobody would believe (никто не поверил) what he said (что он говорил). 
2. On making his discovery, the astronomer had presented it to the International Astronomical Congress, in a great demonstration. But he was in Turkish costume, and so nobody would believe what he said.
 
3. Grown-ups are like that (взрослые – они такие: досл. взрослые похожи на то)...
Fortunately (к счастью), however (тем не менее), for the reputation (для репутации) of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator made a law (сделал закон) that his subjects (подданные), under pain of death (под страхом смертной казни: досл. под болью смерти), should change to European costume (должны сменить одежду на европейский костюм).
3. Grown-ups are like that...
Fortunately, however, for the reputation of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator made a law that his subjects, under pain of death, should change to European costume.
 
4. So in 1920 the astronomer gave (дал: досл. «to give – gave – given» – давать) his demonstration all over again (опять), dressed with impressive style and elegance (одет впечатляюще стильно и элегантно: досл. одет с впечатляющим стилем и элегантностью). And this time everybody accepted his report (приняли его доклад: «to accept – accepted» – принимать). 
If I have told you these details (если я рассказал вам эти детали) about the asteroid, and made a note of its number for you (и указал номер: досл. сделал замечание его номера для вас), it is on account (на счёт) of the grown-ups and their ways (взглядов: досл. дорог, путей). When you tell them (когда ты говоришь им) that you have made a new friend (что у тебя новый друг: досл. ты сделал нового друга), they never ask you (никогда не спросят) any questions about essential matters (по сути: досл. о существенных делах). They never say (никогда не скажут) to you, "What does his voice sound like (какой у него голос: досл. на что похоже звучит)? What games does he love best (какие игры он любит большего всего: «the best» – наилучший)? Does he collect butterflies (коллекционирует бабочек)?" Instead (взамен), they demand (требуют): "How old is he (сколько лет ему)? How many brothers has he (сколько братьев он имеет)? How much does he weigh (весит)? How much money does his father make (сколько денег зарабатывает его отец: досл. как много денег делает)?" Only from these figures (только по этим чертам, цифрам) do they think they have learned anything (что-либо) about him. 
If you were to say to the grown-ups (если бы вы сказали взрослым): "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick (из розового кирпича), with geraniums in the windows (геранью на окне) and doves on the roof (голубами на крыше)," they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all (они не в состоянии будут представить его вообще: досл. они не будут способны поймать идею этого дома в целом). You would have to say to them (вам нужно сказать им): "I saw a house that cost (стоит) $ 20,000." Then they would exclaim (они воскликнули бы):
"Oh, what a pretty (милый) house that is!" 
Just so (точно так же), you might (могли) say to them: 
"The proof (доказательство) that the little prince existed (существует: «to exist – existed» – существовать) is that he was charming (очарователен), that he laughed (смеялся), and that he was looking for a sheep (разыскивал ягнёнка: вообще-то «ягнёнок» – «lamb», а «sheep» – овца). If anybody wants a sheep (если кто-то хочет ягнёнка), that is a proof that he exists (это доказательство того, что он существует)."
And what good would it do to tell them that (и что толку было бы им это говорить: досл. что хорошего это сделало бы сказать им это)? They would shrug their shoulders (пожали бы плечами), and treat you like a child (воспримут тебя как ребёнка). But if you said to them: 
"The planet he came from (пришёл с) is Asteroid B-612," then they would be convinced (были бы убеждены), and leave you in peace from their questions (и перестали бы задавать вопросы: досл. оставили бы вас в спокойствии от их вопросов). 
They are like that (они такие). One must not hold it against them (не надо против них выступать: досл. один не должен держать это против них). Children should always show great forbearance toward (детям должно всегда проявлять огромную терпимость к) grown-up people (взрослые люди). 
But certainly (но конечно же), for us who understand life (для нас, понимающих жизнь: досл. для нас, кто понимает жизнь), figures are a matter of indifference (цифры не имеют значения: досл. цифры есть дело безразличия). I should have liked to begin (я хотел бы начать) this story (историю) in the fashion of the fairy-tales (в стиле сказки). I should have like to say (хотел бы сказать): "Once upon a time (как-то давным-давно) there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself (едва ли больше него самого), and who had need of a sheep... (которому нужен был ягнёнок)" 
To those (для тех) who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth (звучало бы правдоподобнее: досл. это дало бы больше воздуха правды) to my story. 
For I do not want any one (кто-то, любой) to read my book carelessly (беззаботно). I have suffered too much grief (мне было тяжело: досл. я страдал слишком много скорби) in setting down these memories (упорядочить воспоминания). Six years have already passed (6 лет уже прошло) since my friend went away from me (с тех пор, как мой друг покинул меня: досл. ушёл о меня), with his sheep. If I try to describe him here (если я пытаюсь его описать здесь), it is to make sure that I shall not forget him (чтобы быть уверенным, что я его не забуду). To forget a friend is sad (забывать друга – печально: «to forget – forgot» – забывать). Not every one has had a friend (не у каждого был друг). And if I forget him, I may become (могу стать) like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything (которые больше не заинтересованы ничем: «to be interested in anything» – быть заинтересованным в чём-либо) but figures... 
It is for that purpose (для этой цели), again (опять же), that I have bought (купил: «to buy – bought» – купить) a box of paints (коробку красок) and some pencils (карандаши). It is hard (тяжело) to take up (приниматься) drawing again at my age (в моём возрасте), when I have never made (никогда не делал) any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try (я конечно попытаюсь) to make my portraits as true to life as possible (по возможности нарисовать похожие портреты: досл. сделать портреты такими правдивыми к жизни как возможно). But I am not at all sure of success (но я в общем не уверен в успехе). One drawing goes along all right (получается совсем правильным), and another has no resemblance to its subject (другой не имеет схожести к его предмету). I make some errors (делаю некоторые ошибки), too, in the little prince's height (рост маленького принца): in one place (в одном месте) he is too tall (слишком высок) and in another too short (короток). And I feel some doubts (чувствую некоторые сомнения) about the color of his costume. So I fumble (нащупывать) along as best I can (хорошо, как только мог), now (сейчас) good, now bad, and I hope (надеюсь) generally fair-to-middling (в общем так себе). 
In certain more important details (в некоторых более важных деталях) I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something that will not be my fault (вина). My friend never explained anything to me (никогда ничего не объяснял). He thought (думал), perhaps (возможно), that I was like himself (что я такой, как он). But I, alas (увы), do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes (не знаю, как увидеть ягнёнка сквозь стены коробки). Perhaps I am a little like (немного похож) the grown-ups. I have had to grow old (я повзрослел). 
4. So in 1920 the astronomer gave his demonstration all over again, dressed with impressive style and elegance. And this time everybody accepted his report. 
If I have told you these details about the asteroid, and made a note of its number for you, it is on account of the grown-ups and their ways. When you tell them that you have made a new friend, they never ask you any questions about essential matters. They never say to you, "What does his voice sound like? What games does he love best? Does he collect butterflies?" Instead, they demand: "How old is he? How many brothers has he? How much does he weigh? How much money does his father make?" Only from these figures do they think they have learned anything about him. 
If you were to say to the grown-ups: "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick, with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof," they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all. You would have to say to them: "I saw a house that cost $ 20,000." Then they would exclaim:
"Oh, what a pretty house that is!" 
Just so, you might say to them: 
"The proof that the little prince existed is that he was charming, that he laughed, and that he was looking for a sheep. If anybody wants a sheep, that is a proof that he exists."
And what good would it do to tell them that? They would shrug their shoulders, and treat you like a child. But if you said to them: 
"The planet he came from is Asteroid B-612," then they would be convinced, and leave you in peace from their questions. 
They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should always show great forbearance toward grown-up people. 
But certainly, for us who understand life, figures are a matter of indifference. I should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of the fairy-tales. I should have like to say: "Once upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself, and who had need of a sheep..." 
To those who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth to my story. 
For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered too much grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already passed since my friend went away from me, with his sheep. If I try to describe him here, it is to make sure that I shall not forget him. To forget a friend is sad. Not every one has had a friend. And if I forget him, I may become like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything but figures... 
It is for that purpose, again, that I have bought a box of paints and some pencils. It is hard to take up drawing again at my age, when I have never made any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try to make my portraits as true to life as possible. But I am not at all sure of success. One drawing goes along all right, and another has no resemblance to its subject. I make some errors, too, in the little prince's height: in one place he is too tall and in another too short. And I feel some doubts about the color of his costume. So I fumble along as best I can, now good, now bad, and I hope generally fair-to-middling. 
In certain more important details I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something that will not be my fault. My friend never explained anything to me. He thought, perhaps, that I was like himself. But I, alas, do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes. Perhaps I am a little like the grown-ups. I have had to grow old.

	
Chapter 5
1. As each day passed (как проходил каждый день) I would learn (изучал), in our talk (как я говорил: досл. в нашем разговоре), something (что-то) about the little prince's planet, his departure (отъезд) from it, his journey (путешествие). The information would come very slowly (поступала очень медленно), as it might chance (могло случиться) to fall from his thoughts (выпасть из его мыслей). It was in this way (это было в этом пути) that I heard (услышал: «to hear – heard» – слышать), on the third (третий) day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs (катастрофа с баобабом). 
This time, once more (ещё раз: досл. раз больше), I had the sheep to thank for it (я должен благодарить ягнёнка за это: досл. я имел ягнёнка поблагодарить за это). For the little prince asked (спросил) me abruptly (резко) - as if seized by a grave doubt (так будто выхвачено серьёзными сомнениями) – "It is true, isn't it (не правда ли: досл. не есть это), that sheep eat little bushes (ягнёнок ест маленькие кустарников)?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad (я доволен)!"
I did not understand (я не понимал) why it was so important (почему это так важно) that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added (добавил):
"Then it follows (это следует) that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out (отметил) to the little prince that baobabs were not (не есть) little bushes, but, on the contrary (напротив), trees as big as castles (деревья такие же большие, как замок); and that even if (даже если) he took a whole herd (стадо) of elephants away with him (туда с собой), the herd would not eat up one single baobab (ни одного баобаба: досл. один единственный баобаб). 
The idea of the herd of elephants (идея о стаде слонов) made the little prince laugh (заставила принца смеяться: досл. сделала маленького принца смеющимся).
"We would have to put them one on top of the other (нам придётся поставить из друг на друга: досл. одного на верхушку другого)," he said.
1. As each day passed I would learn, in our talk, something about the little prince's planet, his departure from it, his journey. The information would come very slowly, as it might chance to fall from his thoughts. It was in this way that I heard, on the third day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs. 
This time, once more, I had the sheep to thank for it. For the little prince asked me abruptly - as if seized by a grave doubt-- "It is true, isn't it, that sheep eat little bushes?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad!"
I did not understand why it was so important that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added:
"Then it follows that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out to the little prince that baobabs were not little bushes, but, on the contrary, trees as big as castles; and that even if he took a whole herd of elephants away with him, the herd would not eat up one single baobab. 
The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh.
"We would have to put them one on top of the other," he said.  
 
2. But he made a wise comment (мудрое пояснение):
"Before they grow so big (перед тем, как они выросли такими большими), the baobabs start out by being little (они были маленькими: досл. баобабы начали с быть маленькими)."
"That is strictly correct (очень правильно: досл. строго правильно)," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs (почему ты хочешь, чтобы ягнёнок ел маленькие баобабы)?"
He answered me at once (сразу же), "Oh, come, come! (ладно, ладно)", as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident (так как если бы он говорил о чём-то, что было очевидно). And I was obliged (был обязан) to make a great mental effort (сделать огромное умственное усилие) to solve (развязать) this problem, without any assistance (без какого-либо участия).
Indeed (на самом деле), as I learned (как я узнал), there were on the planet (было на планете) where the little prince lived – as on all (как и на всех) planets – good plants (растения) and bad plants. In consequence (в следствие), there were good seeds (семена) from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible (невидимые). They sleep deep (спят глубоко) in the heart of the earth's darkness (в сердце земной темноты), until some one among them (кто-то среди них) is seized with the desire to awaken (поднимается с желанием проснуться). Then this little seed will stretch itself (делают усилия) and begin (начинают) – timidly at first (робко с начала) – to push a charming little sprig (давать очаровательный маленький росток: досл. толкать росток) inoffensively upward toward the sun (безобидно вверх к солнцу). If it is only a sprout of radish (росток редиса) or the sprig of a rose-bush (побег куста роз), one would let it grow wherever it might wish (можно позволить им расти где угодно). But when it is a bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible (нужно уничтожить его настолько быстро, насколько возможно), the very first instant that one recognizes it (в первое мгновение, как узнали его). 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet (сейчас были на планете ужасные семена на планете) that was the home (была домом) of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil (почва) of that planet was infested (наводнены) with them. A baobab is something you will never (баобаб – это такое, от чего вы никогда), never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late (никогда не сможете отделаться, если заметите слишком поздно: «to get rid of» – отделаться от кого-то или чего-то). It spreads (распространяется) over the entire (всей) planet. It bores clear through it with its roots (он пронизывает её всю своими корнями). And if the planet is too small (слишком мала), and the baobabs are too many (слишком много), they split it in pieces (разделят её на части)... 
2. But he made a wise comment:
"Before they grow so big, the baobabs start out by being little."
"That is strictly correct," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs?"
He answered me at once, "Oh, come, come!", as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident. And I was obliged to make a great mental effort to solve this problem, without any assistance.
Indeed, as I learned, there were on the planet where the little prince lived-- as on all planets-- good plants and bad plants. In consequence, there were good seeds from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible. They sleep deep in the heart of the earth's darkness, until some one among them is seized with the desire to awaken. Then this little seed will stretch itself and begin-- timidly at first-- to push a charming little sprig inoffensively upward toward the sun. If it is only a sprout of radish or the sprig of a rose-bush, one would let it grow wherever it might wish. But when it is a bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible, the very first instant that one recognizes it. 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet that was the home of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil of that planet was infested with them. A baobab is something you will never, never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late. It spreads over the entire planet. It bores clear through it with its roots. And if the planet is too small, and the baobabs are too many, they split it in pieces...
 
3. "It is a question of discipline (это вопрос дисциплины)," the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning (когда ты закончил утренние процедуры), then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet (тогда время привести в порядок твою планету), just so (точно так же), with the greatest care (с наибольшей заботой). You must see to it (ты должен следить) that you pull up regularly (вытянуть постоянно) all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be distinguished (с первого момента, когда их можно отличить) from the rosebushes which they resemble (которые они напоминают) so closely in their earliest youth (так близко в их наиболее ранней юности). It is very tedious (скучный) work," the little prince added, "but very easy (лёгкий)." 
3. "It is a question of discipline," the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning, then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet, just so, with the greatest care. You must see to it that you pull up regularly all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be distinguished from the rosebushes which they resemble so closely in their earliest youth. It is very tedious work," the little prince added, "but very easy."
 
4. And one day (однажды: досл. один день) he said to me: "You ought to make (должен сделать) a beautiful drawing, so that (чтобы) the children where you live (там, где ты живёшь) can see exactly how all this is (точно видели, как всё это есть). That would be very useful to them (это было бы очень полезно для них) if they were to travel some day (если им придётся путешествовать когда-то). Sometimes (иногда)," he added, "there is no harm (это не вред) in putting off a piece of work until another day (отложить часть работы на другой день). But when it is a matter of baobabs (но если дело касается баобабов), that always means a catastrophe (это всегда означает катастрофу). I knew a planet that was inhabited (была заселена) by a lazy man (ленивым человеком). He neglected (проигнорировал) three little bushes..." 
So, as the little prince described it to me (как маленький принц описал мне это), I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like (мне не очень нравится) to take the tone of a moralist (держать тон поучения). But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood (опасность баобабов так мало понимаема), and such considerable risks would be run by anyone (это угрожает любому: досл. и такой значительный риск может бежать кем угодно) who might get lost (потеряться) on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through my reserve (нарушу своё правило: досл. прорвусь сквозь). "Children (дети)," I say plainly (просто), "watch out for the baobabs (присматривайте за баобабами)!" 
My friends, like myself (мои друзья, как и я сам), have been skirting this danger for a long time (были окружены этой опасностью долгое время: «skirted» – окруженный и «skirt» – юбка), without ever knowing it (даже без знания этого); and so it is for them (это для них) that I have worked so hard over (я работал так тяжело над) this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means (урок, который был преподан мне в этом смысле: «pass» – передавать, проходить) is worth all the trouble it has cost me (стоит всех тех хлопот, которые он мне стоил: «to be worth» – стоить чего-либо). 
Perhaps (возможно) you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book (почему нет других рисунков в этой книге) as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs? (таких же чудесных и впечатляющих, как рисунок баобаба)" 
The reply is simple (ответ прост). I have tried (я пытался). But with the others I have not been successful (но с другими я не преуспел). When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity (я вдохновлялся срочной необходимостью: досл. я был несом передо мной  вдохновляющей силой срочной необходимости). 
4. And one day he said to me: "You ought to make a beautiful drawing, so that the children where you live can see exactly how all this is. That would be very useful to them if they were to travel some day. Sometimes," he added, "there is no harm in putting off a piece of work until another day. But when it is a matter of baobabs, that always means a catastrophe. I knew a planet that was inhabited by a lazy man. He neglected three little bushes..." 
So, as the little prince described it to me, I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like to take the tone of a moralist. But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood, and such considerable risks would be run by anyone who might get lost on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through my reserve. "Children," I say plainly, "watch out for the baobabs!" 
My friends, like myself, have been skirting this danger for a long time, without ever knowing it; and so it is for them that I have worked so hard over this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means is worth all the trouble it has cost me. 
Perhaps you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs?" 
The reply is simple. I have tried. But with the others I have not been successful. When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity.

Chapter 6
1. Oh, little prince! Bit by bit (понемногу) I came to understand (я пришёл к пониманию) the secrets of your sad little life (секретов твоей грустной маленькой жизни)... For a long time (длительное время) you had found your only entertainment (ты находил своё единственное развлечение) in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset (в тихом удовольствии созерцания заката: «sunset» – «sun+set» – солнце + садиться). I learned that new (новую) detail on the morning of the fourth (четвёртый) day, when you said to me: "I am very fond of (люблю: «to be fond of» – любить, увлекаться чем-то) sunsets. Come, let us go look (пойдём посмотрим) at a sunset now."
1. Oh, little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the secrets of your sad little life... For a long time you had found your only entertainment in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset. I learned that new detail on the morning of the fourth day, w hen you said to me: "I am very fond of sunsets. Come, let us go look at a sunset now." 
 
2. "But we must wait (должны подождать)," I said.
"Wait? For what? (Ждать? Чего?)"
"For the sunset (заката). We must wait until it is time (пока не придёт время)." 
At first (поначалу) you seemed to be very much surprised (ты казался очень удивлённым). And then you laughed to yourself (рассмеялся: досл. рассмеялся к себе). You said to me (ты сказал мне):
"I am always thinking that I am at home (я постоянно думаю, что я дома)!" 
Just so (именно так). Everybody knows (каждый знает) that when it is noon (полдень) in the United States the sun is setting (садится) over France (над Францией). 
If you could fly to France in one minute (если бы ты мог долететь до Франции за 1 минуту: досл. в 1 минуту), you could go straight into the sunset (ты вошёл бы прямо в закат), right from noon (сразу же после полдня). Unfortunately (к несчастью), France is too far away for that (слишком далеко для этого). But on your tiny (крошечной) planet, my little prince (мой маленький принц), all you need do is move your chair a few steps (тебе достаточно переставить стул: досл. всё, что ты должен сделать, есть передвинуть твой стул на несколько шагов). You can see the day end (конец дня) and the twilight falling (как опускаются сумерки: досл. сумерки падают) whenever you like (когда бы ты ни захотел)... 
"One day (один день)," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times (видел закат 44 раза)!"
And a little later (чуть погодя) you added:
"You know – one loves the sunset, when one is so sad (опечаленные любят закат: досл. один любит закат, когда один печальный)..."
"Were you so sad, then (значит, тебе было грустно: досл. был ты так печален, тогда)?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets (на день 44 заката)? 
But the little prince made no reply (не ответил: досл. сделал ни одного ответа). 
2. "But we must wait," I said.
"Wait? For what?"
"For the sunset. We must wait until it is time." 
At first you seemed to be very much surprised. And then you laughed to yourself. You said to me:
"I am always thinking that I am at home!" 
Just so. Everybody knows that when it is noon in the United States the sun is setting over France. 
If you could fly to France in one minute, you could go straight into the sunset, right from noon. Unfortunately, France is too far away for that. But on your tiny planet, my little prince, all you need do is move your chair a few steps. You can see the day end and the twilight falling whenever you like... 
"One day," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times!"
And a little later you added:
"You know - one loves the sunset, when one is so sad..."
"Were you so sad, then?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets? 
But the little prince made no reply.
	

Chapter 7
1. On the fifth (пятый) day – again (опять), as always (как всегда), it was thanks to the sheep (это было благодаря ягнёнку) – the secret of the little prince's life (секрет жизни маленького принца) was revealed (был открыт) to me. Abruptly (резко), without anything to lead up to it (совершенно внезапно: досл. без чего-то подготавливающему к этому: «to lead up to» – подготовить), and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem (как если бы вопрос родился из долгих и молчаливых раздумий (медитаций) над его проблемой), he demanded (потребовал):
"A sheep – if it eats little bushes (ест маленький кусты), does it eat flowers, too (ест он также цветы)?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach (ест всё, что находит в пределах своей досягаемости)."
"Even (даже) flowers that have thorns (шипы)?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns –  what use are they (какой в них прок: досл. какая польза есть они)?" 
I did not know (я не знал). At that moment (в тот момент) I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt (был занят, пытаясь отвинтить болт) that had got stuck in my engine (который застрял в двигателе). I was very much worried (был очень обеспокоен), for it was becoming clear to me (так как до меня доходило) that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious (поломка моего самолёта была чрезвычайно серьёзной). And I had so little drinking-water left (и у меня так мало осталось питьевой воды) that I had to fear for the worst (я начал бояться наихудшего). "The thorns – what use are they?" 
The little prince never let go of a question (всегда настаивал: досл. никогда не отпускал вопроса), once he had asked it (однажды задав его). As for me (что касается меня), I was upset over that bolt (был расстроен из-за болта). And I answered with the first thing (первая мысль) that came into my head (пришла в мою голову):
"The thorns are of no use at all (от шипов вообще никакой пользы). Flowers have thorns just for spite (у цветов шипы от злости)!"
"Oh!" 
There was a moment of complete silence (момент полнейшей тишины). Then the little prince flashed back at me (выпалил мне: «flash» – вспышка), with a kind of resentfulness (с обидой: досл. с видом обиженности): "I don't believe (верить) you! Flowers are weak creatures (слабые существа). They are naіve (наивные). They reassure themselves as best they can (успокаивают себя как только могут: досл. успокаивают себя наилучше они могут). They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons (ужасное оружие)..."
1. On the fifth day - again, as always, it was thanks to the sheep - the secret of the little prince's life was revealed to me. Abruptly, without anything to lead up to it, and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem, he demanded:
"A sheep - if it eats little bushes, does it eat flowers, too?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach."
"Even flowers that have thorns?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns - what use are they?" 
I did not know. At that moment I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt that had got stuck in my engine. I was very much worried, for it was becoming clear to me that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious. And I had so little drinking-water left that I had to fear for the worst. "The thorns-- what use are they?" 
The little prince never let go of a question, once he had asked it. As for me, I was upset over that bolt. And I answered with the first thing that came into my head:
"The thorns are of no use at all. Flowers have thorns just for spite!"
"Oh!" 
There was a moment of complete silence. Then the little prince flashed back at me, with a kind of resentfulness: "I don't believe you! Flowers are weak creatures. They are naive. They reassure themselves as best they can. They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons..." 
 
2. I did not answer (я не ответил). At that instant (в то мгновение) I was saying to myself (я сказал себе): "If this bolt still won't turn (если этот болт не провернётся), I am going to knock it out with the hammer (я выбью его молотом)." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts (побеспокоил мои мысли). "And you actually (действительно) believe that the flowers – "
"Oh, no!" I cried (закричал). "No, no no! I don't believe anything (я ни во что не верю). I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see (неужели ты не видишь) – I am very busy with matters of consequence (досл. делом особой важности)!" 
He stared at me, thunderstruck (уставился на меня, словно поражённый громом).
"Matters of consequence!" 
He looked at me there (он смотрел на меня), with my hammer in my hand (с молотом в руке), my fingers black with engine-grease (пальцы чёрные от моторного масла), bending down over an object (согнувшегося на штуковиной) which seemed to him extremely ugly (которая казалась ему невероятно уродливой)...
"You talk just like the grown-ups (ты говоришь, как взрослый)!"
That made me a little ashamed (мне стало немного стыдно: досл. это сделало меня немного застыдившимся). But he went on (продолжал), relentlessly (неумолимо):
"You mix everything up together (ты всё смешал вместе)... You confuse everything (спутал всё)..." 
He was really very angry (злой). He tossed his golden curls in the breeze (он встряхнул своими золотыми кудрями на ветру).
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced (некоторый краснолицый) gentleman. He has never smelled a flower (не знает запаха цветов: никогда не нюхал: «to smell – smelled» –  пахнуть, чувствовать запах). He has never looked at a star (не глядел на звёзды). He has never loved any one (никогда никого не любил). He has never done anything in his life (он ничего не делал в своей жизни) but add up figures (только складывал цифры). And all day he says over and over, just like you (и весь день он повторял снова и снова, точно как ты): 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride (это заставляло его раздуваться о гордости: «swell up» – распухать). But he is not a man (он не человек) – he is a mushroom (гриб)!"
"A what (Что)?"
"A mushroom!" 
The little prince was now white with rage (побелел от ярости: досл. был сейчас белый с яростью).
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years (растили шипы миллионы лет). For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same (миллионы лет овцы если их, точно также). And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them (почему цветы утруждают себя, взращивая шипы, от которых нет пользы: досл. почему цветы идут в так много забот)? Is the warfare (война) between (между) the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence (не более ли это важно) than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums (чем суммы краснолицего джентельмена)? And if I know – I, myself (я, лично) – one flower which is unique in the world (единственный в мире), which grows nowhere but on my planet (нигде не растет, кроме моей планеты: досл. растет нигде, только на моей планете), but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning (но которое один ягнёнок может уничтожить в одно мгновение какого-то утра), without even noticing what he is doing (даже не замечая, что делает) – Oh! You think that is not important!" 
His face turned from white to red (превратилось с белого в красное) as he continued (по мере того, как он продолжал: «to continue – continued» – продолжать):
"If some one loves a flower (если кто-то любит цветок), of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars (цветение которого одно на миллионы звезд: досл. которого только одно цветение растёт во всех миллионах и миллионах звезд), it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars (этого достаточно, чтобы сделать его счастливым, когда он смотрит на звезды). He can say to himself (он может сказать себе), 'Somewhere, my flower is there... (где-то там мой цветок…)' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened (все его звёзды померкнут)... And you think that is not important!" 
He could not say anything more (ему нечего было добавить). His words were choked (были задушены) by sobbing (рыданием). 
The night had fallen (наступила ночь: досл. ночь упала). I had let my tools drop from my hands (я оставил инструменты: досл. дал инструментам выпасть из моих рук). Of what moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death (и какое значение имели мой молот, болт, жажда или смерть: «moment» в устойчивых выражениях может означать «важность»)? On one star, one planet, my planet (моей планете), the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted (был маленький принц, который нуждался в утешении). I took him in my arms (взял на руки), and rocked (качать) him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger (цветок, который ты любишь, в безопасности: досл. не есть в опасности). I will draw you a muzzle (намордник) for your sheep. I will draw you a railing (ограду) to put around your flower (поставить вокруг цветка). I will – " 
I did not know what to say to him (я не знал, что ему сказать). I felt awkward and blundering (я чувствовал себя неудобно и глупо: досл. ошибочно). I did not know how I could reach him (я не знал, как его достичь), where (где) I could overtake (обогнать) him and go on hand in hand with him once more (идти рука об руку с ним ещё раз). 
It is such a secret place, the land of tears (это такое тайное место, земля слёз). 
2. I did not answer. At that instant I was saying to myself: "If this bolt still won't turn, I am going to knock it out with the hammer." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts. "And you actually believe that the flowers - "
"Oh, no!" I cried. "No, no no! I don't believe anything. I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see - I am very busy with matters of consequence!" 
He stared at me, thunderstruck.
"Matters of consequence!" 
He looked at me there, with my hammer in my hand, my fingers black with engine-grease, bending down over an object which seemed to him extremely ugly...
"You talk just like the grown-ups!"
That made me a little ashamed. But he went on, relentlessly:
"You mix everything up together... You confuse everything..." 
He was really very angry. He tossed his golden curls in the breeze.
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced gentleman. He has never smelled a flower. He has never looked at a star. He has never loved any one. He has never done anything in his life but add up figures. And all day he says over and over, just like you: 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride. But he is not a man-- he is a mushroom!"
"A what?"
"A mushroom!" 
The little prince was now white with rage.
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years. For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same. And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them? Is the warfare between the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums? And if I know - I, myself - one flower which is unique in the world, which grows nowhere but on my planet, but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning, without even noticing what he is doing-- Oh! You think that is not important!" 
His face turned from white to red as he continued:
"If some one loves a flower, of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars, it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars. He can say to himself, 'Somewhere, my flower is there...' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened... And you think that is not important!" 
He could not say anything more. His words were choked by sobbing. 
The night had fallen. I had let my tools drop from my hands. Of what moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death? On one star, one planet, my planet, the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted. I took him in my arms, and rocked him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger. I will draw you a muzzle for your sheep. I will draw you a railing to put around your flower. I will - " 
I did not know what to say to him. I felt awkward and blundering. I did not know how I could reach him, where I could overtake him and go on hand in hand with him once more. 
It is such a secret place, the land of tears. 

Chapter 8
1. I soon learned to know this flower better (вскоре я узнал этот цветок лучше: досл. я научился знать). On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple (всегда были очень просты). They had only one ring of petals (кольцо лепестков); they took up no room at all (не занимали места: «room» не только «комната», но и «место»); they were a trouble to nobody (никому не создавали проблем: досл. были проблемой для никого). One morning they would appear in the grass (утром они появлялись в траве), and by night they would have faded peacefully away (к ночи мирно исчезали: досл. ночью увядали мирно прочь: «to fade – faded» – увядать, линять). But one day, from a seed (семена) blown from no one knew where (принесённому ветром неизвестно откуда: «to blow – blown» – дуть), a new flower had come up (появился); and the little prince had watched very closely (наблюдал очень внимательно: досл. очень близко) over this small sprout (росток) which was not like any other small sprouts (который не походил на другие маленькие ростки) on his planet. It might (это мог), you see (понимаете), have been a new kind (новый вид) of baobab. 
The shrub (куст) soon stopped growing (перестал расти вскоре: досл. вскоре остановил рост), and began to get ready to produce a flower (и собрался цвести: досл. начал ставать готов производить цветок). The little prince, who was present (присутствовал) at the first appearance (появление) of a huge bud (огромного бутона), felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition (предчувствовал сразу же чудесное видение) must emerge from it (которое должно было появиться с этого). But the flower was not satisfied (но цветку было мало: досл. цветок не был удовлетворен) to complete the preparations for her beauty (завершить приготовления к своей красоте: «to prepare» – приготовить, «preparation» – приготовления) in the shelter of her green chamber (в укрытии его зелёных покоев: в англ. «flower» – she (она), поэтому «her», а рус. цветок – муж. рода). She chose her colors with the greatest care (он (она) подбирал цвета особо тщательно: досл. с величайшей заботой). She adjusted (приводил(а) в порядок) her petals (лепестки) one by one (один за другим). She did not wish to go out into the world (он(а) не хотел(а) появляться в этот мир) all rumpled (мятый), like the field poppies (полевые маки). It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear (он(а) хотел(а) появиться в полном сиянии своей красоты: досл. это было только полное сияние ее красоты, что она хотела появиться). Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature (кокетливое создание)! And her mysterious adornment (её таинственное украшение) lasted for days and days (длилось многие дни). 
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise (точно на рассвете), she suddenly showed herself (она внезапно показала себя). And, after working with all this painstaking precision (после такой старательной, четкой работы: досл. после работы со всей этой старательной четкостью), she yawned (зевнула) and said:
"Ah! I am scarcely awake (я не вполне проснулась). I beg that you will excuse me (прошу прощения: досл. я прошу, чтобы вы извинили меня). My petals are still all disarranged (мои лепестки в таком беспорядке)..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration (не смог удержать свой восторг):
"Oh! How beautiful you are (какая ты красивая)!"
"Am I not (не правда ли: досл. не есть я)?" the flower responded, sweetly (ответила сладко). "And I was born at the same moment as the sun... (я родилась одновременно с солнцем)"
The little prince could guess easily enough (мог сразу догадаться: «to guess – guessed» – догадываться) that she was not any too modest (она была не слишком скромна) – but how moving (трогательной) – and exciting (волнующей) – she was! "I think it is time for breakfast (думаю, пора завтракать: досл. это есть время для завтрака)," she added an instant later (мгновение спустя). "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs (если вы будете так добры и позаботитесь о мне: досл. если вы имели бы доброту подумать о моих потребностях) – " 
And the little prince, completely abashed (совсем смущённый), went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water (пошёл искать лейку со свежей водой: «sprinkling» – брызгающий, «can» – бидон). 
1. I soon learned to know this flower better. On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple. They had only one ring of petals; they took up no room at all; they were a trouble to nobody. One morning they would appear in the grass, and by night they would have faded peacefully away. But one day, from a seed blown from no one knew where, a new flower had come up; and the little prince had watched very closely over this small sprout which was not like any other small sprouts on his planet. It might, you see, have been a new kind of baobab. 
The shrub soon stopped growing, and began to get ready to produce a flower. The little prince, who was present at the first appearance of a huge bud, felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition must emerge from it. But the flower was not satisfied to complete the preparations for her beauty in the shelter of her green chamber. She chose her colors with the greatest care. She adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to go out into the world all rumpled, like the field poppies. It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear. Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature! And her mysterious adornment lasted for days and days. 
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise, she suddenly showed herself. And, after working with all this painstaking precision, she yawned and said:
"Ah! I am scarcely awake. I beg that you will excuse me. My petals are still all disarranged..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration:
"Oh! How beautiful you are!"
"Am I not?" the flower responded, sweetly. "And I was born at the same moment as the sun..."
The little prince could guess easily enough that she was not any too modest – but how moving – and exciting – she was! "I think it is time for breakfast," she added an instant later. "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs – " 
And the little prince, completely abashed, went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water. 


qwerty
2. So, he tended (заботился: «to tend – tended» – заботиться) the flower. 
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity (так же и она начала очень скоро мучить его своим тщеславием) – which was (которое было), if the truth be known (если говорить по правде: досл. если правда известна), a little difficult to deal with (немного трудно было иметь дело: «to deal with» – иметь дело). One day, for instance (например), when she was speaking of her four thorns (четыре шипа), she said to the little prince: "Let the tigers come with their claws (пусть только появятся тигры с их когтями)!" 
2. So, he tended the flower. 
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity - which was, if the truth be known, a little difficult to deal with. One day, for instance, when she was speaking of her four thorns, she said to the little prince: "Let the tigers come with their claws!"
 
3. "There are no tigers on my planet (на моей планете нет тигров)," the little prince objected (возразил). "And, anyway (в любом случае), tigers do not eat weeds (бурьян)." "I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly. "Please excuse me... (извини меня)". "I am not at all afraid of tigers (я вообще не боюсь тигров)," she went on (продолжала), "but I have a horror of drafts (сквозняки). I suppose (предполагаю) you wouldn't have a screen (у тебя не найдётся ширмы) for me?" "A horror of drafts (боязнь сквозняков) – that is bad luck (несчастье), for a plant (растение)," remarked (заметил) the little prince, and added to himself (и про себя добавил), "This flower is a very complex (запутанный, составной, сложный) creature..." "At night I want you to put me under a glass globe (накрыл меня стеклянным шаром: досл. я хочу, чтобы ты поставил меня под…). It is very cold (очень холодно) where you live. In the place I came from (там, откуда я пришла) – "
3. "There are no tigers on my planet," the little prince objected. "And, anyway, tigers do not eat weeds." "I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly. "Please excuse me..." "I am not at all afraid of tigers," she went on, "but I have a horror of drafts. I suppose you wouldn't have a screen for me?" "A horror of drafts - that is bad luck, for a plant," remarked the little prince, and added to himself, "This flower is a very complex creature..." "At night I want you to put me under a glass globe. It is very cold where you live. In the place I came from - " 
 
4. But she interrupted herself at that point (замолчала: досл. прервала себя по этому поводу). She had come in the form of a seed (пришла в форме семена). She could not have known anything of any other worlds (не могла что-либо знать о других мирах). Embarrassed  over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a naive untruth (смущенная, что попалась на такой простой неправде: досл. дала себе быть пойманной на краю…), she coughed (кашлянула) two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong (чтобы маленький принц почувствовал себя виноватым: досл. в порядке чтобы поставить маленького принца в «неправильность»). "The screen?" "I was just going to look for it (я как раз собирался идти искать её) when you spoke to me..."
4. But she interrupted herself at that point. She had come in the form of a seed. She could not have known anything of any other worlds. Embarrassed over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a naive untruth, she coughed two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong. "The screen?" "I was just going to look for it when you spoke to me..."
 
5. Then she forced her cough a little more (немного усилила кашель) so that he should suffer from remorse just the same (чтобы и он страдал от угрызений совести точно так же). 
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love (несмотря на все добрые намерения, которые были неотделимы от его любви), had soon come to doubt her (вскоре начал в ней сомневаться: досл. пришёл к сомнению). He had taken seriously words which were without importance (воспринимал всерьез несерьезные слова: досл. брал серьезно слова, которые были без важности), and it made him very unhappy (от этого был несчастлив: досл. это делало его несчастливым). "I ought not to have listened to her (я не должен был ее слушать)," he confided (доверился) to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers (не надо слушать цветы). One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance (нужно просто смотреть на них и вдыхать их аромат). Mine perfumed all my planet (мой цветок сделал всю планету благоухающей). But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace (не знал, как найти удовольствие в ее изяществе). This tale of claws (басни о коготках), which disturbed me so much (которые меня так беспокоили), should only have filled my heart (наполняли моё сердце) with tenderness and pity (нежностью и состраданием)." 
And he continued his confidences (продолжал свое признание):
"The fact is (дело в том) that I did not know how to understand anything (не знал, как понять)! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words (я должен был судить по делам, а не по словам). She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me (окутывала меня своим ароматом и сиянием). I ought never to have run away (не должен был убегать) from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection (привязанность) that lay behind her poor little stratagems (которая скрывалась за ее маленькими бедными уловками: досл. лежало за…).
Flowers are so inconsistent (непоследовательны)! But I was too young to know how to love her... (но я был слишком юн, чтобы знать, как её любить)" 
5. Then she forced her cough a little more so that he should suffer from remorse just the same. 
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love, had soon come to doubt her. He had taken seriously words which were without importance, and it made him very unhappy. "I ought not to have listened to her," he confided to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers. One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance. Mine perfumed all my planet. But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace. This tale of claws, which disturbed me so much, should only have filled my heart with tenderness and pity." 
And he continued his confidences:
"The fact is that I did not know how to understand anything! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words. She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me. I ought never to have run away from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection that lay behind her poor little stratagems.
Flowers are so inconsistent! But I was too young to know how to love her..."

Chapter 9
1. I believe (верю) that for his escape (для его побега) he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds (он предпочел улететь со стаей диких птиц: досл. он взял преимущество миграции стаи диких птиц). On the morning of his departure (в утро его отбытия) he put his planet in perfect order (он привел планету в идеальный порядок). He carefully cleaned out (тщательно почистил) his active volcanoes. He possessed (владел) two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning (на них удобно было готовить завтрак по утрам: досл. они были удобны для того, чтобы жарить). He also had one volcano that was extinct (потухший). But, as he said (как он говорил), "One never knows! (кто его знает: досл. один никогда знает)" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out (хорошо почищены), volcanoes burn slowly and steadily (горят медленно и спокойно (монотонно)), without any eruptions (без каких-либо извержений). Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney (как огонь в дымоходе). 
On our earth (у нас: досл. на нашей земле) we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes (мы ещё не доросли до того, чтобы чистить наши вулканы). That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us (вот почему они нас постоянно беспокоят: досл. вот почему они не приносят конца проблем для нас). 
The little prince also pulled up (выполол), with a certain sense of dejection (с каким-то унынием: досл. с некоторым чувством уныния), the last little shoots of the baobabs (последние маленькие ростки баобабов). He believed that he would never want to return (он верил, что не захочет вернуться). But on this last morning (в то последнее утро) all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him (все эти обычные заботы (задания) были ему очень дороги). And when he watered the flower (полили цветок) for the last time, and prepared to place (приготовился поместить) her under the shelter of her glass globe (под стеклянный колпак), he realized (осознал) that he was very close to tears (что готов расплакаться: досл. был близок к слезам). "Goodbye," he said to the flower. 
But she made no answer (не ответила).
"Goodbye," he said again (опять).
The flower coughed (кашлянула). But it was not because she had a cold (но не потому, что ей было холодно).
"I have been silly (я была глупа)," she said to him, at last (наконец). "I ask your forgiveness (я прошу твоего прощения). Try to be happy (постарайся быть счастливым)..." 
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches (он был удивлён этим отсутствием упреков). He stood there all bewildered (он стоял там весь смущенный), the glass globe held arrested in mid-air (стеклянный колпак повис на полпути: досл. держался остановленным в «среднем воздухе»). He did not understand this quiet sweetness (этой тихой нежности).
"Of course I love you (конечно же я тебя люблю)," the flower said to him. "It is my fault (это моя вина) that you have not known it all the while (что ты не знал это все это время). That is of no importance (это неважно). But you (но ты) — you have been just as foolish as I (ты был таким же дураком, как и я). Try to be happy... let the glass globe be (оставь колпак). I don't want it any more (мне он больше не нужен: досл. я не хочу его больше)."
"But the wind (но ветер) — "
"My cold is not so bad as all that (моя простуда не так плоха как все это)... the cool night air will do me good (холодный ночной воздух мне полезен: досл. делает мне хорошо). I am a flower."
"But the animals (животные) —"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars (я должна вытерпеть присутствие двух или трех гусениц) if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies (если хочу познакомиться с бабочками). It seems that they are very beautiful (кажется, они очень красивые). And if not the butterflies – and the caterpillars — who will call upon me (кто будет со мной говорить)? You will be far away (ты будешь далеко)... as for the large animals (что касается больших животных) — I am not at all afraid of any of them (я вообще их не боюсь). I have my claws (когти)." 
And, naively (наивно), she showed her four thorns (шипы). Then she added: "Don't linger like this (не задерживайся здесь (сейчас)). You have decided to go away (ты решил уйти). Now go (так иди: досл. теперь иди)!" For she did not want him to see her crying (она не хотела, чтобы он видел ее плачущей). She was such a proud flower (она была таким гордым цветком)... 
1. I believe that for his escape he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds. On the morning of his departure he put his planet in perfect order. He carefully cleaned out his active volcanoes. He possessed two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning. He also had one volcano that was extinct. But, as he said, "One never knows!" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out, volcanoes burn slowly and steadily, without any eruptions. Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney. 
On our earth we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes. That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us. 
The little prince also pulled up, with a certain sense of dejection, the last little shoots of the baobabs. He believed that he would never want to return. But on this last morning all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him. And when he watered the flower for the last time, and prepared to place her under the shelter of her glass globe, he realized that he was very close to tears. "Goodbye," he said to the flower. 
But she made no answer.
"Goodbye," he said again.
The flower coughed. But it was not because she had a cold.
"I have been silly," she said to him, at last. "I ask your forgiveness. Try to be happy..." 
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches. He stood there all bewildered, the glass globe held arrested in mid-air. He did not understand this quiet sweetness.
"Of course I love you," the flower said to him. "It is my fault that you have not known it all the while. That is of no importance. But you - you have been just as foolish as I. Try to be happy... let the glass globe be. I don't want it any more."
"But the wind - "
"My cold is not so bad as all that... the cool night air will do me good. I am a flower."
"But the animals -"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies. It seems that they are very beautiful. And if not the butterflies - and the caterpillars - who will call upon me? You will be far away... as for the large animals - I am not at all afraid of any of them. I have my claws." 
And, naively, she showed her four thorns. Then she added: "Don't linger like this. You have decided to go away. Now go!" For she did not want him to see her crying. She was such a proud flower...
 

Chapter 10
1. He found himself in the neighborhood  (оказался по соседству: досл. нашел себя в соседстве) of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them (поэтому он начал с визита на них: «to begіn — began» — начать), in order to add to his knowledge (чтобы пополнить знания: «in order to» — для того, чтобы). 
The first of them was inhabited by a king (на первом жил король: досл. был населен королем). Clad in royal purple and ermine (одетый в королевское одеяние с горностаем ), he was seated upon a throne (он сидел на троне) which was at the same time both simple and majestic (который был прост и прекрасен: досл. который в одно и то же время был оба прост и прекрасен).
"Ah! Here is a subject (а вот и подчиненный)," exclaimed (воскликнул) the king, when he saw the little prince coming (когда увидел, как появился маленький принц: досл. увидел приходящего).
And the little prince asked himself (сам себя):
"How could he recognize (узнать) me when he had never seen me before (никогда не видел до того)?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings (что короли воспринимают мир упрощенно: досл. как мир упрощен для королей). To them, all men are subjects (для них все люди подданные).
"Approach, so that I may see you better, (подойди, дабы я мог видеть тебя лучше)" said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody (был невероятно горд быть королем хоть для кого-то). 
1. He found himself in the neighborhood of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them, in order to add to his knowledge 
The first of them was inhabited by a king. Clad in royal purple and ermine, he was seated upon a throne which was at the same time both simple and majestic.
"Ah! Here is a subject," exclaimed the king, when he saw the little prince coming.
And the little prince asked himself:
"How could he recognize me when he had never seen me before?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings. To them, all men are subjects.
"Approach, so that I may see you better," said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody.  
2. The little prince looked everywhere (огляделся: досл. смотрел везде) to find a place to sit down (присесть); but the entire (вся) planet was crammed (переполнен) and obstructed (загроможден) by the king's magnificent ermine robe (прекрасной королевской горностаевой мантией). So he remained standing upright (поэтому он стоял: досл. оставался стоять прямо), and, since he was tired (так как он устал), he yawned (зевнул: «to yawn — yawned» — зевать).
"It is contrary to etiquette (это перечит правилам этикета) to yawn in the presence of a king, (в присутствии короля)" the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so (я запрещаю тебе делать так)."
"I can't help it (ничего не поделаешь: досл. я не могу помочь этому). I can't stop myself (не могу остановиться)," replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed (совершенно сбитый с толку). "I have come on a long journey (я долго был в пути), and I have had no sleep (не спал: досл. не имел сна)…"
"Ah, then (ну тогда)," the king said. "I order you to yawn (приказываю тебе зевать). It is years since I have seen anyone yawning (я много лет уже не видел, как зевают). Yawns, to me (для меня), are objects of curiosity (интересны: досл. предмет любопытства). Come, now (Ну, давай)! Yawn again (зевни опять)! It is an order (это приказ)."
"That frightens (пугает) me... I cannot, any more..." murmured (пробормотал) the little prince, now completely abashed (совершенно сконфуженный).
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I - I order you sometimes to yawn (иногда зевать) and sometimes to - "
He sputtered (засуетился) a little, and seemed vexed (казалось огорчился).
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon (на чем король обстоятельно настаивал) was that his authority should be respected (чтобы его власть уважалась). He tolerated no disobedience (он не терпел непослушания). He was an absolute monarch (абсолютный монарх). But, because he was a very good man (но поскольку он был очень хорошим человеком), he made his orders reasonable (он делал свои приказы разумными).
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example (для примера: досл. дорогой примера), "if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird (превратиться на морскую птицу), and if the general did not obey me (не послушает), that would not be the fault of the general (это не была бы вина генерала). It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince (поступила застенчивая просьба от маленького принца).
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle (и величественно собрал складки своей мантии).
But the little prince was wondering (удивлен)... The planet was tiny (крошечная). Over what could this king really rule (чем мог король тут править)?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg (прошу) that you will excuse my asking you a question – (извинить меня за вопрос: досл. извинить мое задавание вопроса)"
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him (поспешил заверить его).
"Sire - over what do you rule (Сир — чем Вы правите)?"
"Over everything (всем)," said the king, with magnificent simplicity (с величественной простотой).
"Over everything?" 
The king made a gesture (жест), which took in his planet, the other planets, and all the stars (который захватил его планету, другие планеты и все звезды).
"Over all that (всем этим)?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered. 
For his rule was not only absolute (власть была не только абсолютной): it was also universal (также вселенской).
"And the stars obey you (звезды подчиняются Вам)?"
"Certainly they do (естественно: досл. конечно они так делают)," the king said. "They obey instantly (подчиняются немедля). I do not permit insubordination (не позволяю непослушания)." 
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at (такая власть удивляла маленького принца: досл. была предметом для маленького принца удивляться). If he had been master of such complete authority (если бы он располагал такой безграничной властью: досл. был хозяином такой полной власти), he would have been able to watch the sunset (он смог бы видеть закат), not forty-four times in one day (не 44 раза на день), but seventy-two (72), or even a hundred (даже 100), or even two hundred times (или даже 200), without ever having to move his chair (даже не передвигая стул). And because (потому) he felt a bit sad (он немного взгрустнул: досл. почувствовал немного грусти) as he remembered (вспомнил) his little planet which he had forsaken (которую он покинул: «to forsake — forsook — forsaken» — покидать, бросать), he plucked up his courage (фразеологизм: набрался храбрости) to ask the king a favor (попросить об услуге (милости):
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness (будьте так добры: досл. сделайте мне такое добро)... Order the sun to set (прикажите солнцу сесть)... "
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly (порхать с цветка на цветок, как бабочка), or to write a tragic drama (написать трагедию), or to change himself into a sea bird (превратиться в морскую птицу), and if the general did not carry out (выполнит) the order that he had received (приказ, который получил), which one of us would be in the wrong? (который из нас был бы неправ)" the king demanded (настаивал). "The general, or myself? (генерал или я)"
"You," said the little prince firmly (непоколебимо).
"Exactly (точно). One must require from each one (можно требовать от человека) the duty which each one can perform (обязанности, которые он может выполнить)," the king went on (продолжал). "Accepted authority (общепризнанная власть) rests first of all on reason (покоится прежде всего на разуме). If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea (броситься в море), they would rise up in revolution (они восстанут: досл. поднимутся в революции). I have the right to require obedience (у меня есть право требовать послушания) because my orders are reasonable (потому что мои приказы разумны)."
"Then my sunset (тогда как мой закат)?" the little prince reminded (напомнил) him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it (он никогда не забыл однажды заданных вопросов).
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it (я прикажу это). But, according to my science of government (согласно моей науке управления), I shall wait until conditions are favorable (я должен подождать благоприятных условий)."
"When will that be (когда это будет)?" inquired (осведомился) the little prince.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else (прежде, чем что-либо сказать) he consulted a bulky almanac (заглянул в большой календарь: досл. проконсультировался). "Hum! Hum! That will be about (это будет около) - about - that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight (сегодня вечером около 20 минут восьмого). And you will see how well I am obeyed (как меня почитают: досл. как меня слушают)."

2. The little prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down; but the entire planet was crammed and obstructed by the king's magnificent ermine robe. So he remained standing upright, and, since he was tired, he yawned.
"It is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king," the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so."
"I can't help it. I can't stop myself," replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed. "I have come on a long journey, and I have had no sleep..."
"Ah, then," the king said. "I order you to yawn. It is years since I have seen anyone yawning. Yawns, to me, are objects of curiosity. Come, now! Yawn again! It is an order."
"That frightens me... I cannot, any more..." murmured the little prince, now completely abashed.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I - I order you sometimes to yawn and sometimes to - "
He sputtered a little, and seemed vexed.
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon was that his authority should be respected. He tolerated no disobedience. He was an absolute monarch. But, because he was a very good man, he made his orders reasonable.
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example, "if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not obey me, that would not be the fault of the general. It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince.
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle.
But the little prince was wondering... The planet was tiny. Over what could this king really rule?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg that you will excuse my asking you a question - "
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him.
"Sire - over what do you rule?"
"Over everything," said the king, with magnificent simplicity.
"Over everything?" 
The king made a gesture, which took in his planet, the other planets, and all the stars.
"Over all that?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered. 
For his rule was not only absolute: it was also universal.
"And the stars obey you?"
"Certainly they do," the king said. "They obey instantly. I do not permit insubordination." 
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at. If he had been master of such complete authority, he would have been able to watch the sunset, not forty-four times in one day, but seventy-two, or even a hundred, or even two hundred times, with out ever having to move his chair. And because he felt a bit sad as he remembered his little planet which he had forsaken, he plucked up his courage to ask the king a favor:
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness... Order the sun to set..."
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly, or to write a tragic drama, or to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not carry out the order that he had received, which one of us would be in the wrong?" the king demanded. "The general, or myself?"
"You," said the little prince firmly.
"Exactly. One much require from each one the duty which each one can perform," the king went on. "Accepted authority rests first of all on reason. If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea, they would rise up in revolution. I have the right to require obedience because my orders are reasonable."
"Then my sunset?" the little prince reminded him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it.
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it. But, according to my science of government, I shall wait until conditions are favorable."
"When will that be?" inquired the little prince.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else he consulted a bulky almanac. "Hum! Hum! That will be about - about - that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight. And you will see how well I am obeyed."
3. The little prince yawned. He was regretting (сожалел) his lost (потерянный) sunset. And then, too, he was already beginning to be a little bored (ему уже стало скучно: досл. ему начинало становиться скучно).
"I have nothing more to do here (мне нечего больше здесь)," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again (поэтому я отправляюсь снова в путь)." "Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister (сделаю тебя министром)!"
"Minister of what (министром чего)?"
"Minster of - of Justice! (правосудия)"
"But there is nobody here to judge (но здесь некого судить)!"
"We do not know that (мы этого не знаем)," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom (я еще не осмотрел свои владения: досл. я еще не сделал полный обход). I am very old (я очень стар). There is no room (места) here for a carriage (повозка, карета). And it tires me to walk (ходьба меня утомляет)." 
"Oh, but I have looked already (я уже посмотрел)!" said the little prince, turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet (повернулся, чтобы еще раз взглянуть на другую сторону планеты). On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all (там, как и здесь, никого нет)...
"Then you shall judge yourself (будешь судить себя)," the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all (это тяжелее всего). It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others (значительно тяжелее судить себя самого, чем судить других). If you succeed in (если ты преуспеешь) judging yourself rightly (объективно), then you are indeed a man of true wisdom (ты станешь человеком истинной мудрости)."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere (судить себя можно везде). I do not need to live (мне не нужно жить) on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe (у меня есть причины полагать) that somewhere (где-то) on my planet there is an old rat (крыса). I hear him at night (слышу ее ночью). You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death (приговорить к смерти). Thus his life will depend on your justice (но ее жизнь будет зависеть от твоего правосудия). But you will pardon him on each occasion (будешь миловать каждый раз); for he must be treated thriftily (к ней надо относиться бережно). He is the only one we have (она у нас одна-единственная)."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death (мне не нравится приговаривать к смерти). And now I think I will go on my way (я, пожалуй, пойду)."
"No," said the king. 
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure (закончив приготовления к отбытию), had no wish to grieve the old monarch (не хотел печалить старого монарха).
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed (полного подчинения)," he said, "he should be able to give me a reasonable order (сможет дать мне разумный приказ). He should be able, for example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute (приказать мне уйти по истечению этой минуты). It seems to me that conditions are favorable (мне кажется, что условия подходящие)..."
As the king made no answer (не ответил: досл. не сделал ответа), the little prince hesitated (колебался) a moment. Then, with a sigh (вздох), he took his leave (отбыл: досл. взял свой уход).
"I made you my Ambassador (посол)," the king called out (выкрикнул), hastily (поспешно).
He had a magnificent air of authority (его власть была удивительна (прекрасна)).
"The grown-ups are very strange (странные)," the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey (продолжал свой путь).
3. The little prince yawned. He was regretting his lost sunset. And then, too, he was already beginning to be a little bored.
"I have nothing more to do here," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again." "Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister!"
"Minister of what?"
"Minster of - of Justice!"
"But there is nobody here to judge!"
"We do not know that," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom. I am very old. There is no room here for a carriage. And it tires me to walk." 
"Oh, but I have looked already!" said the little prince, turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet. On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all...
"Then you shall judge yourself," the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all. It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others. If you succeed in judging yourself rightly, then you are indeed a man of true wisdom."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere. I do not need to live on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe that somewhere on my planet there is an old rat. I hear him at night. You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death. Thus his life will depend on your justice. But you will pardon him on each occasion; for he must be treated thriftily. He is the only one we have."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death. And now I think I will go on my way."
"No," said the king. 
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure, had no wish to grieve the old monarch.
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed," he said, "he should be able to give me a reasonable order. He should be able, for example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute. It seems to me that conditions are favorable..."
As the king made no answer, the little prince hesitated a moment. Then, with a sigh, he took his leave.
"I made you my Ambassador," the king called out, hastily.
He had a magnificent air of authority.
"The grown-ups are very strange," the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 11
1. The second planet was inhabited (вторая планета была населена) by a conceited man (себялюбцем: досл. тщеславным, самоуверенным человеком). "Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer (кажется, у меня поклонник: досл. я есть около получения визита почитателем)!" he exclaimed from afar (издали), when he first (впервые) saw the little prince coming (пришел).
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers (для тщеславного все другие — поклонники). 
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing (какая у Вас чудная шляпа: досл. это чудная шляпа Вы носите)."
"It is a hat for salutes (для приветствия)," the conceited man replied (ответил). "It is to raise in salute (дабы поднимать ее в приветствии) when people acclaim (шумно приветствовать) me. Unfortunately (к сожалению), nobody at all ever passes this way (вообще никто никогда здесь не проходил)."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about (не понимал, о чем говорит тщеславный человек).
"Clap your hands, one against the other (хлопни, ударь ладонями друг по другу)," the conceited man now directed (приказал) him. 
1. The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man. "Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!" he exclaimed from afar, when he first saw the little prince coming.
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers. 
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing."
"It is a hat for salutes," the conceited man replied. "It is to raise in salute when people acclaim me. Unfortunately, nobody at all ever passes this way."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about.
"Clap your hands, one against the other," the conceited man now directed him. 

 
2. The little prince clapped his hands (хлопнул). The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute (поднял шляпу в скромном приветствии).
"This is more entertaining (куда занимательнее) than the visit to the king (чем визит к королю)," the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands (начал опять хлопать), one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise (после пяти минут таких упражнений) the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony (устал от монотонности игры).
"And what should one do to make the hat come down (что нужно сделать, дабы шляпа упала, опустилась)?" he asked. 
But the conceited man did not hear him (не слышал его). Conceited people never hear anything but praise (себялюбцы не слышат ничего, кроме похвалы).
"Do you really admire me very much (ты действительно мной восхищен)?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean - 'admire' (что значит — восхищен)?"
"To admire mean that you regard me (расцениваешь меня) as the handsomest (наиболее симпатичного), the best-dressed (наилучше одетого), the richest (наибогатейшего), and the most intelligent (самого умного) man on this planet."
"But you are the only man (единственный) on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness (сделай милость). Admire me just the same (именно так)."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly (слегка пожав плечами), "but what is there in that to interest you so much (что в этом такого интересного)?"
And the little prince went away (ушел).
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd (взрослые действительно очень странные)," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey (продолжил путешествие). 
2. The little prince clapped his hands. The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute.
"This is more entertaining than the visit to the king," the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands, one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony.
"And what should one do to make the hat come down?" he asked. 
But the conceited man did not hear him. Conceited people never hear anything but praise.
"Do you really admire me very much?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean - 'admire'?"
"To admire mean that you regard me as the handsomest, the best-dressed, the richest, and the most intelligent man on this planet."
"But you are the only man on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness. Admire me just the same."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly, "but what is there in that to interest you so much?"
And the little prince went away.
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 12
1.The next planet was inhabited by a tippler (на следующей планете жил пьяница: досл. следующая планета была населена пьяницей). This was a very short visit (очень короткий визит), but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection (поверг в уныние).
"What are you doing there (что ты здесь делаешь)?" he said to the tippler, whom he found (которого он нашел) settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles (сидевшего в тишине перед коллекцией пустых бутылок) and also a collection of full bottles (а также полных).
"I am drinking (я пью)," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air (скорбно: досл. со скорбным воздухом). 
1.The next planet was inhabited by a tippler. This was a very short visit, but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection.
"What are you doing there?" he said to the tippler, whom he found settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles and also a collection of full bottles.
"I am drinking," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air. 

 
2. "Why are you drinking (почему ты пьешь)?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget (так я могу забыть)," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired (осведомился) the little prince, who already was sorry for him (который уже жалел его).
"Forget that I am ashamed (что мне стыдно)," the tippler confessed (сознался), hanging his head (свесив голову).
"Ashamed of what (стыдно чего)?" insisted (настаивал) the little prince, who wanted to help him (который хотел ему помочь).
"Ashamed of drinking (стыдно, что пью)!" The tippler brought his speech to an end (высказал все: досл. принес свою речь до конца), and shut himself up in an impregnable silence (и замолчал: досл. замкнул себя в неприступную тишину).
And the little prince went away (ушел прочь), puzzled (озадаченный).
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.
2. "Why are you drinking?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired the little prince, who already was sorry for him.
"Forget that I am ashamed," the tippler confessed, hanging his head.
"Ashamed of what?" insisted the little prince, who wanted to help him.
"Ashamed of drinking!" The tippler brought his speech to an end, and shut himself up in an impregnable silence.
And the little prince went away, puzzled.
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.  

Chapter 13
1. The fourth (четвертая) planet belonged to a businessman (принадлежала бизнесмену). This man was so much occupied (занят) that he did not even raise his head (даже не поднял головы) at the little prince's arrival (по прибытии маленького принца).
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out (погасла)."
"Three and two make five (3 + 2 = 5). Five and seven make twelve (5 + 7 = 12). Twelve and three make fifteen (12 + 3 = 15). Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two (15 + 7 = 22). Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight (22 + 6 = 28). I haven't time to light it again (у меня нет времени ее зажечь). Twenty-six and five make thirty-one (26 + 5 = 31). Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one (итого: досл. это делает 501 622 731)."
1. The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. This man was so much occupied that he did not even raise his head at the little prince's arrival.
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out."
"Three and two make five. Five and seven make twelve. Twelve and three make fifteen. Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two. Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight. I haven't time to light it again. Twenty-six and five make thirty-one. Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one."  
 
2. "Five hundred million what (5 миллионов чего)?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there (ты все еще здесь)? Five-hundred-and-one million (501 миллион) - I can't stop (не могу остановиться)... 
I have so much to do (столько нужно сделать: досл. у меня есть так много делать)! I am concerned with matters of consequence (забочусь о делах особой важности). I don't amuse myself with balderdash (не отвлекаюсь на ерунду). Two and five make seven (2 + 5 = 7)..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had (никогда в своей жизни) let go of a question once he had asked it (не оставлял вопрос, однажды заданный). 
The businessman raised his head. 
"During the fifty-four years (54 года) that I have inhabited this planet, I have been disturbed only three times (меня беспокоили (отвлекали) только трижды). The first time was twenty-two years ago (первый раз 22 года назад), when some giddy goose (легкомысленный дурак (или пустоголовая гусыня)) fell from goodness knows where (неизвестно откуда). He made the most frightful noise (он поднял такой ужасный шум) that resounded all over the place (отзвуки которого были везде: досл. который «отзвучивал», «to sound» —  звучать, «to resound» —  звучать повторно), and I made four mistakes in my addition (допустил 4 ошибки в подсчетах). The second time, eleven years ago (11 лет назад), I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism (приступ ревматизма). I don't get enough exercise (мало двигался: досл. не делал достаточно упражнений). I have no time for loafing («ничегонеделания»). The third time (3 раз) — well, this is it (это он и есть)! I was saying, then (я говорил, значит), five-hundred-and-one millions — "
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace (осознал, что ему не будет покоя: досл. нет надежды быть оставленным в покое) until he answered this question (пока не ответит).
"Millions of those little objects (этих маленьких штучек)," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the sky (которые можно увидеть в небе)."
"Flies (мухи)?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects (сверкающие штучки)."
"Bees (пчелы)?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects (маленькие золотые штучки) that set lazy men to idle dreaming (которые располагают ленивых людей к бесполезным мечтаниям). As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars (имеете в виду звезды)?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do (что Вы делаете) with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate (точный)."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them (Ничего. Они мне принадлежат: досл. я ими владею)."
"You own the stars?"
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who — (но я уже видел короля, который —) "
"Kings do not own, they reign over (короли не владеют, они правят). It is a very different matter (разные вещи)."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars (и что хорошего во владении звездами)?"
"It  does me the good of making me rich (то, что я богат: досл. это делает мне хорошо делая меня богатым)."
"And what good does it do you to be rich (быть богатым)?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars (могу купить больше звезд: досл. это делает это возможным для меня купить больше звезд), if any are ever discovered (если какие-либо откроют)."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor tippler (рассуждает, как мой бедный пьяница)..." 
2. "Five hundred million what?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there? Five-hundred-and-one million - I can't stop... 
I have so much to do! I am concerned with matters of consequence. I don't amuse myself with balderdash. Two and five make seven..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question once he had asked it. 
The businessman raised his head. 
"During the fifty-four years that I have inhabited this planet, I have been disturbed only three times. The first time was twenty-two years ago, when some giddy goose fell from goodness knows where. He made the most frightful noise that resounded all over the place, and I made four mistakes in my addition. The second time, eleven years ago, I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism. I don't get enough exercise. I have no time for loafing. The third time - well, this is it! I was saying, then, five -hundred-and-one millions - "
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace until he answered this question.
"Millions of those little objects," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the sky."
"Flies?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects."
"Bees?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects that set lazy men to idle dreaming. As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them."
"You own the stars?"
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who - "
"Kings do not own, they reign over. It is a very different matter."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars?"
"It does me the good of making me rich."
"And what good does it do you to be rich?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars, if any are ever discovered."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor tippler..."
3. Nevertheless (все же), he still had some more questions (у него все еще были вопросы). 
"How is it possible for one to own the stars (как можно владеть звездами: досл. как это возможно для одного)?"
"To whom do they belong (кому они принадлежат)?" the businessman retorted (возразил), peevishly (раздраженно).
"I don't know. To nobody (не знаю. Никому)."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it (потому что я первый об этом полумал)."
"Is that all that is necessary (и это все, что нужно)?"
"Certainly (конечно). When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours (когда ты находишь бриллиант, который никому не принадлежит, — он твой). When you discover an island (открываешь остров) that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea (появляется идея) before any one else (прежде других), you take out a patent on it (получаешь патент): it is yours. So with me (так и я): I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them (никто раньше меня не додумался ими владеть)."
"Yes, that is true (правда)," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them (а что Вы с ними делаете)?"
"I administer them (управляю ими)," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them (считаю и пересчитываю). It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence (заинтересован в делах особой важности)." 
The little prince was still not satisfied (маленькому принцу было мало: досл. все еще не был удовлетворен). 
"If I owned a silk scarf (у меня есть шелковый шарф)," he said, "I could put it around my neck (я завязываю его на шее) and take it away with me (беру с собой). If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with me (вырвать цветок и забрать с собой). But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven (не можете сорвать звезды с небес)..."
"No. But I can put them in the bank (положить в банк)."
"Whatever does that mean (а это что значит)?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper (маленький листик). And then I put this paper in a drawer (ящик) and lock it with a key (запираю на ключ)."
"And that is all (и все?)?"
"That is enough (достаточно)," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining (смешно)," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic (скорее поэтично). But it is of no great consequence." 
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups (дела особой важности маленький принц представлял совсем не так, как взрослые). 
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation (разговор) with the businessman, "which I water (поливаю) every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows (кто его знает)). It is of some use (польза) to my volcanoes , and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them (от того, что я ими владею). But you are of no use to the stars (но звездам нет никакой пользы)..." 
The businessman opened his mouth (открыл рот), but he found nothing to say in answer (не нашел что сказать в ответ). 
And the little prince went away. 
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether (совершенно) extraordinary," he said simply (просто), talking to himself as he continued on his journey (разговаривая сам с собой и продолжая путешествие).
3. Nevertheless, he still had some more questions. 
"How is it possible for one to own the stars?"
"To whom do they belong?" the businessman retorted, peevishly.
"I don't know. To nobody."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it."
"Is that all that is necessary?"
"Certainly. When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you discover an island that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea before any one else, you take out a patent on it: it is yours. So with me: I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them."
"Yes, that is true," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them?"
"I administer them," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them. It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence." 
The little prince was still not satisfied. 
"If I owned a silk scarf," he said, "I could put it around my neck and take it away with me. If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with me. But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven..."
"No. But I can put them in the bank."
"Whatever does that mean?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper. And then I put this paper in a drawer and lock it with a key."
"And that is all?"
"That is enough," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic. But it is of no great consequence." 
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups. 
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation with the businessman, "which I water every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows). It is of some use to my volcanoes , and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them. But you are of no use to the stars..." 
The businessman opened his mouth, but he found nothing to say in answer. 
And the little prince went away. 
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary," he said simply, talking to himself as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 14
1. The fifth (пятая) planet was very strange (странная). It was the smallest of all (наименьшая изо всех). There was just enough room (как раз достаточно места) on it for a street lamp (уличного фонаря) and a lamplighter (фонарщика). The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of (маленький принц не мог объяснить, какая польза от: досл. был не в состоянии достигнуть какого-либо объяснения использования) a street lamp and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens (где-то в небесах), on a planet which had no people (без людей), and not one house (ни единого дома). But he said to himself, nevertheless (все же):
"It may well be (вполне может быть) that this man is absurd (ненормален). But he is not so (но не так) absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler (король, тщеславный человек, бизнесмен и пьяница). For at least his work has some meaning (его труд имеет хоть какой-то смысл). When he lights his street lamp (когда он зажигает фонарь), it is as if he brought one more star to life (он будто дает жизнь еще одной звезде), or one flower. When he puts out (гасит) his lamp, he sends (отправляет) the flower, or the star, to sleep (спать). That is a beautiful occupation (чудесное занятие). And since it is beautiful (поскольку это прекрасно), it is truly useful (это действительно полезно)."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully (почтенно) saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why (почему) have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders (таков порядок (так заведено))," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted (зажег) his lamp again. 
1. The fifth planet was very strange. It was the smallest of all. There was just enough room on it for a street lamp and a lamplighter. The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of a street lamp and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens, on a planet which had no people, and not one house. But he said to himself, nevertheless:
"It may well be that this man is absurd. But he is not so absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler. For at least his work has some meaning. When he lights his street lamp, it is as if he brought one more star to life, or one flower. When he puts out his lamp, he sends the flower, or the star, to sleep. That is a beautiful occupation. And since it is beautiful, it is truly useful."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted his lamp again.
 
2. "But why have you just lighted it again? (почему зажгли снова)"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. 
"I do not understand (не понимаю)," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand (нечего понимать: досл. есть ничего понимать)," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders (порядок — это порядок (ход вещей)). Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead (вытер лоб) with a handkerchief (носовым платком) decorated with red squares (украшенным красными звездами). 
"I follow a terrible profession (у меня ужасная профессия: досл. я следую ужасной профессии). In the old days (в прежние времена: досл. в старые дни) it was reasonable (это было разумно). I put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation (весь остаток дня я отдыхал: досл. имел для отдыха) and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time (ход вещей изменился с тех пор)?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the tragedy (вот в чем беда)! From year to year (из года в год) the planet has turned more rapidly (планета поворачивалась более резко) and the orders have not been changed!"
"Then what (что тогда)?" asked the little prince.
"Then — the planet now makes a complete turn every minute (теперь планета делает полный оборот за 1 минуту), and I no longer have a single second for repose (у меня нет ни единой секунды для отдыха). Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!"
"That is very funny (забавно)! A day lasts (день длится) only one minute, here where you live (здесь, где Вы живете)!"
"It is not funny at all (вовсе)!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking together a month has gone by (пока мы разговаривали, прошел месяц)."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes (30 минут). Thirty days. Good evening."
2. "But why have you just lighted it again?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. 
"I do not understand," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders. Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead with a handkerchief decorated with red squares. 
"I follow a terrible profession. In the old days it was reasonable. I put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the tragedy! From year to year the planet has turned more rapidly and the orders have not been changed!"
"Then what?" asked the little prince.
"Then-- the planet now makes a complete turn every minute, and I no longer have a single second for repose. Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!"
"That is very funny! A day lasts only one minute, here where you live!"
"It is not funny at all!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking together a month has gone by."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes. Thirty days. Good evening."
 3. And he lighted his lamp again. As the little prince watched him (наблюдал за ним), he felt that he loved (он чувствовал, что он любит) this lamplighter who was so faithful (который так верен) to his orders. He remembered the sunsets (он помнил закаты) which he himself had gone to seek (которые он сам отправился искать (к которым стремился)), in other days, merely by pulling up his chair (в основном передвигая стул); and he wanted to help (захотел помочь) his friend. 
"You know (знаете)," he said, "I can tell you a way (могу подсказать: досл. могу сказать путь) you can rest whenever you want to (отдыхать, когда бы Вы ни захотели)..."
"I always (всегда) want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible (это возможно) for a man to be faithful and lazy (ленивым) at the same time (в одно и то же время). 
The little prince went on (продолжил) with his explanation (объяснение):
"Your planet is so small (так мала) that three strides will take you all the way around it (можно обойти в три шага). To be always in the sunshine (находиться в солнечном свете), you need only walk along rather slowly (нужно только идти довольно медленно). When you want to rest, you will walk (будешь идти) - and the day will last as long as you like (день будет длиться столько, сколько ты захочешь)."
"That doesn't do me much good (мне о этого мало проку: досл. это не делает мне много хорошего)," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in life is to sleep (одна вещь, которую я люблю в жизни, это сон)."
"Then you're unlucky (тогда Вам не повезло: досл. ты неудачлив)," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp. 
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey (продолжал дальше свое путешествие), "that man would be scorned by all the others (был бы осмеян другими): by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless (и все же) he is the only one of them all (он единственный из всех их) who does not seem to me ridiculous (кто для меня не смешен). Perhaps that is because (может это потому) he is thinking of something else besides himself (он думает о чем-то еще, кроме себя)." 
He breathed a sigh of regret (вздохнул: досл. выдохнул вздох сожаления), and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend (кого я бы сделал моим другом). But his planet is indeed (в самом деле) too small. There is no room on it for two people (нет места для двоих)..." 
What the little prince did not dare confess (не осмелился сознаться) was that he was sorry most of all to leave this planet (сожалел о том, что покидает эту планету, больше всего), because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets (она освещалась каждый день 1440 закатами)! 
3. And he lighted his lamp again. As the little prince watched him, he felt that he loved this lamplighter who was so faithful to his orders. He remembered the sunsets which he himself had gone to seek, in other days, merely by pulling up his chair; and he wanted to help his friend. 
"You know," he said, "I can tell you a way you can rest whenever you want to..."
"I always want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible for a man to be faithful and lazy at the same time. 
The little prince went on with his explanation:
"Your planet is so small that three strides will take you all the way around it. To be always in the sunshine, you need only walk along rather slowly. When you want to rest, you will walk - and the day will last as long as you like."
"That doesn't do me much good," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in life is to sleep."
"Then you're unlucky," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp. 
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey, "that man would be scorned by all the others: by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless he is the only one of them all who does not seem to me ridiculous. Perhaps that is because he is thinking of something else besides himself." 
He breathed a sigh of regret, and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend. But his planet is indeed too small. There is no room on it for two people..." 
What the little prince did not dare confess was that he was sorry most of all to leave this planet, because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets!

Chapter 15
1. The sixth (шестая) planet was ten times larger than the last one (в десять раз больше предыдущей). It was inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books (многотомные книги).
"Oh, look (посмотри)! Here is an explorer (исследователь)!" he exclaimed to himself (воскликнул сам себе) when he saw the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table (сел на стол) and panted a little (тяжело и часто дышал немного). He had already traveled so much and so far (он у же так много и так далеко прошел (путешествовал))! 
1. The sixth planet was ten times larger than the last one. It was inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books.
"Oh, look! Here is an explorer!" he exclaimed to himself when he saw the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table and panted a little. He had already traveled so much and so far!
 
2. "Where do you come from (откуда ты пришел)?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book (что это за большая книга)?" said the little prince. "What are you doing (что Вы делаете)?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer (кто такой географ)?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar (ученый) who knows the location (знает месторасположение) of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts (морей, рек, городов, гор и пустынь)."
"That is very interesting (это очень интересно)," said the little prince. 
"Here at last (наконец) is a man who has a real profession (человек, у которого настоящая профессия)!" 
And he cast a look around him (оглянулся: досл. бросил взгляд кругом него) at the planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet (наиболее красивая и величественная планета) that he had ever seen (которую он когда-либо видел).
"Your planet is very beautiful (прекрасна)," he said. "Has it any oceans (на ней есть океаны)?"
"I couldn't tell you (не могу сказать)," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed (был разочарован). "Has it any mountains (а горы: досл. имеет она какие-либо горы)?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either (также)."
"But you are a geographer (но Вы же географ)!"
"Exactly (правильно)," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer (но не исследователь). I haven't a single explorer on my planet (нет ни единого исследователя на моей планете). It is not the geographer (это не географ) who goes out to count (кто отправляется считать) the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about (географ слишком важен дабы везде слоняться). He does not leave his desk (не встает из-за стола: досл. не покидает свою парту). But he receives the explorers in his study (он получает исследователей для научной работы). He asks them questions (задает вопросы), and he notes down (записывает) what they recall of their travels (то, что они вспоминают о своих путешествиях). And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting to him (воспоминания кого-то среди них кажутся ему интересными), the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral character (убедиться в моральности исследователя: досл. требует подтверждения морального характера исследователя)."
"Why is that (зачем)?"
"Because an explorer who told lies (который лжет: досл.говорит неправду) would bring disaster on the books of the geographer (принесет несчастья книгам географа). So would an explorer who drank too much (Так может быть, если исследователь пьет)."
"Why is that (почему)?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double (у пьяного в глазах двоится: досл. видит дважды). Then the geographer would note down two mountains (записать две горы) in a place where there was only one (на месте одной)."
"I know some one (знаю одного человека)," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer (был бы плохим исследователем)."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good (моральность подтверждена: досл. моральный характер показывается как хороший), an inquiry is ordered into his discovery (убедиться в истинности его открытия)." 
"One goes to see it (нужно пойти увидеть его)?"
"No. That would be too complicated (было бы слишком сложно). But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs (у исследователя требуют предоставить доказательства). For example, if the discovery in question (открытие под вопросом) is that of a large mountain (это большая гора), one requires that large stones be brought back from it (требуют большой камень с этой горы)."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement (внезапно заволновался).
"But you - you come from far away (ты, ты пришел издалека)! You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me (должен описать планету)!"
And, having opened his big register (открыл свой большой журнал), the geographer sharpened his pencil (заточил свой карандаш). 
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil (факты сначала записывают карандашом). One waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink (ждут подтверждения перед тем, как записать это чернилами). 
2. "Where do you come from?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book?" said the little prince. "What are you doing?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar who knows the location of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts."
"That is very interesting," said the little prince. 
"Here at last is a man who has a real profession!" 
And he cast a look around him at the planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet that he had ever seen.
"Your planet is very beautiful," he said. "Has it any oceans?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed. "Has it any mountains?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either."
"But you are a geographer!"
"Exactly," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer. I haven't a single explorer on my planet. It is not the geographer who goes out to count the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about. He does not leave his desk. But he receives the explorers in his study. He asks them questions, and he notes down what they recall of their travels. And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting to him, the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral character."
"Why is that?"
"Because an explorer who told lies would bring disaster on the books of the geographer. So would an explorer who drank too much."
"Why is that?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double. Then the geographer would note down two mountains in a place where there was only one."
"I know some one," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good, an inquiry is ordered into his discovery." 
"One goes to see it?"
"No. That would be too complicated. But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs. For example, if the discovery in question is that of a large mountain, one requires that large stones be brought back from it."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement.
"But you - you come from far away! You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me!"
And, having opened his big register, the geographer sharpened his pencil. 
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil. One waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink.
3. "Well (ну)?" said the geographer expectantly (в ожидании).
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting (не очень интересно). It is all so small (все очень маленькое). I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows (кто его знает)."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers (мы не записываем цветов)," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet (цветок — это самое красивое на моей планете)!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are ephemeral (эфемерны, недолговечны)."
"What does that mean (что это значит) — 'ephemeral'?" 
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are most concerned with matters of consequence (географии — это книги, которые заняты делами особой важности). They never become old-fashioned (они никогда не устаревают). It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position (очень редко горы меняют месторасположение). It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters (океаны высыхают). We write of eternal things (мы пишем о вечном)."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again (потухший вулкан может «ожить» опять)," the little prince interrupted (прервал). "What does that mean — 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive (потухший он или нет), it comes to the same thing for us (нам все равно: досл. для нас идет как одна и та же вещь)," said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain (для нас важны горы). It does not change (они не меняются)."
"But what does that mean — 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it (не оставлял однажды заданный вопрос).
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance (такой, какой пребывает в опасности быстрого исчезновения).'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is."
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world (у нее только 4 шипа, чтобы защитить себя от мира). And I have left her on my planet, all alone (оставил ее на планете, совсем одну)!" 
That was his first moment of regret (первое сожаление: досл. момент сожаления). But he took courage once more (набрался храбрости еще раз).
"What place would you advise me to visit now (какую планету Вы бы посоветовали мне посетить)?" he asked.
"The planet Earth (планету Земля)," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation (у нее хорошая репутация)."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower (ушел думая о цветке). 
3. "Well?" said the geographer expectantly.
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting. It is all so small. I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are ephemeral."
"What does that mean-- 'ephemeral'?" 
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are most concerned with matters of consequence. They never become old-fashioned. It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position. It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters. We write of eternal things."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again," the little prince interrupted. "What does that mean - 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive, it comes to the same thing for us," said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain. It does not change."
"But what does that mean - 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it.
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance.'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is."
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world. And I have left her on my planet, all alone!" 
That was his first moment of regret. But he took courage once more.
"What place would you advise me to visit now?" he asked.
"The planet Earth," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower.



Chapter 16
1. So then the seventh planet was the Earth (наконец седьмой планетой была Земля).
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet (не просто обычная планета)! One can count (можно подсчитать: досл. один может подсчитать), there 111 kings (королей) (not forgetting, to be sure (не забывая, естественно), the Negro kings among them (короли африканских стран в том числе)), 7000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men - that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups (в общем, около 2 млрд. взрослых). 
1. So then the seventh planet was the Earth.
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet! One can count, there 111 kings (not forgetting, to be sure, the Negro kings among them), 7000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men - that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups.
 
2. To give you an idea of the size of the Earth (чтобы вы представили себе размеры Земли: досл. дать вам идею), I will tell you that before the invention of electricity (я скажу, что до открытия электричества) it was necessary to maintain (необходимо содержать), over the whole of the six continents (по всем 6 континентам), a veritable army (настоящую армию) of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps. 
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle (вблизи это было бы роскошное зрелище: досл. «видимое» из незначительного расстояния, это сделало бы роскошное представление). The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera (движение этой армии было бы упорядочено, как в балете). First would come the turn of the lamplighters (сначала бы шли фонарщики: досл. первая пришла бы очередь) of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight (засветив свои фонари), these would go off to sleep (они пошли бы спать). 
Next (следующие), the lamplighters of China (Китай) and Siberia would enter (вошли бы) for their steps in the dance (танцуя), and then they too would be waved back into the wings (скрылись бы за кулисами). After that (после этого) would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the stage (никогда не ошиблись бы в порядке выхода на сцену). It would be magnificent (удивительно).
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole (и только человек, ответственный за единственный фонарь на Северном полюсе), and his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole - only these two (только эти двое) would live free from toil and care (жили бы без забот: досл. жили бы свободными от тяжелой работы и заботы): they would be busy twice a year (они были бы заняты дважды в год).
2. To give you an idea of the size of the Earth, I will tell you that before the invention of electricity it was necessary to maintain, over the whole of the six continents, a veritable army of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps. 
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle. The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera. First would come the turn of the lamplighters of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight, these would go off to sleep. 
Next, the lamplighters of China and Siberia would enter for their steps in the dance, and then they too would be waved back into the wings. After that would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the stage. It would be magnificent.
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole, and his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole - only these two would live free from toil and care: they would be busy twice a year.  

Chapter 17
1. When one wishes to play the wit (блеснуть остроумием: «wit» — разум), he sometimes wanders a little from the truth (досл. «уходит немного от правды»). I have not been altogether honest (я не был совсем честен) in what I have told you about the lamplighters (в том, что я рассказал вам о фонарщиках). And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it (я осознаю, что могу создать неправильное представление о нашей планете для тех, кто с ней не знаком: досл. «рискую дать фальшивую идею о…»). Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth (люди занимают очень мало места на Земле). If the two billion inhabitants (2 биллиона жителей) who people its surface (заселяют ее поверхность: «people» не только «люди», но и «заселять») were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together (все стали толпой), as they do for some big public assembly (как они то делают на публичных собраниях), they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide (они легко поместились бы на площади 20 миль длиной и 20 шириной). All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet (все человечество могло бы поместиться на маленьком тихоокеанском островке). 
The grown-ups, to be sure (естественно), will not believe you when you tell them that (не поверят, если вы им это скажете). They imagine that they fill a great deal of space (им кажется, что они занимают огромное пространство). They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs (они возомнили себя такими же важными, как и баобабы). You should advise them, then, to make their own calculations (можете предложить им провести свои подсчеты). They adore figures (они обожают цифры), and that will please them (им это понравится). But do not waste your time on this extra task (не тратьте время на это задание). It is unnecessary (это не понадобится). You have, I know, confidence in me (я знаю, что вы мне доверяете).
1. When one wishes to play the wit, he sometimes wanders a little from the truth. I have not been altogether honest in what I have told you about the lamplighters. And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it. Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth. If the two billion inhabitants who people its surface were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together, as they do for some big public assembly, they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide. All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet. 
The grown-ups, to be sure, will not believe you when you tell them that. They imagine that they fill a great deal of space. They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs. You should advise them, then, to make their own calculations. They adore figures, and that will please them. But do not waste your time on this extra task. It is unnecessary. You have, I know, confidence in me. 
2. When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people (был удивлен, не увидев людей). He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet (он уже начинал бояться, что прибыл не на ту планету), when a coil of gold (клубок золота), the colour of the moonlight (цвета лунного сияния), flashed across the sand (вспыхнул на песке).
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously (вежливо).
"Good evening," said the snake (змея).
"What planet is this on which I have come down? (что это за планета (на которую я прилетел)?)" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth (так на Земле нет людей)?"
"This is the desert (пустыня). There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large (большая)," said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone (присел на камень), and raised his eyes toward the sky (поднял в небо глаза). 
"I wonder (интересно)," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us may find his own again (зажигаются ли звезды в небе для того, чтобы однажды один из нас мог отыскать свою опять)... Look at my planet. It is right there above us (прямо над нами). But how far away it is! (но как она далеко)""It is beautiful (прекрасна)," the snake said. "What has brought you here (как тебя сюда занесло: досл. что тебя сюда принесло)?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower (у меня были проблемы с цветком)," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake. 
And they were both silent (оба молчали). 
"Where are the men (где люди)?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again (возобновил разговор). "It is a little lonely in the desert (немного одиноко в пустыне)..."
"It is also lonely among men (среди людей тоже одиноко)," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time (долго смотрел на нее). 
2. When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people. He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet, when a coil of gold, the colour of the moonlight, flashed across the sand.
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously.
"Good evening," said the snake.
"What planet is this on which I have come down?" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth?"
"This is the desert. There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large," said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his eyes toward the sky. 
"I wonder," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us may find his own again... Look at my planet. It is right there above us. But how far away it is!""It is beautiful," the snake said. "What has brought you here?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake. 
And they were both silent. 
"Where are the men?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again. "It is a little lonely in the desert..."
"It is also lonely among men," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time.
 
3."You are a funny animal (забавное животное)," he said at last (наконец-то). "You are no thicker than a finger (не толще пальца)..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king (я более могущественна, чем палец короля)," said the snake. 
The little prince smiled (улыбнулся). 
"You are not very powerful (ты не очень могущественна). You haven't even any feet (у тебя даже ног нет). You cannot even travel (ты даже путешествовать не можешь)..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you (я могу отнести тебя дальше, чем любой корабль)," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle (она обвилась вокруг лодыжки маленького принца), like a golden bracelet. 
"Whomever I touch (к кому бы я ни прикоснулась), I send back to the earth from whence he came (я отправляю его в землю, откуда он и пришел)," the snake spoke again. "But you are innocent (невинен) and true (правдивый), and you come from a star..." 
The little prince made no reply (не ответил).
"You move me to pity (мне тебя жаль: досл. ты двигаешь меня к жалости) - you are so weak (так беспомощен, слаб) on this Earth made of granite," the snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet (если станешь слишком скучать по своей планете). I can - "
"Oh! I understand you very well (понимаю очень хорошо)," said the little prince. "But why do you always speak in riddles (почему ты постоянно говоришь загадками)?"
"I solve them all (я из разгадываю)," said the snake.
And they were both silent. 
3."You are a funny animal," he said at last. "You are no thicker than a finger..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king," said the snake. 
The little prince smiled. 
"You are not very powerful. You haven't even any feet. You cannot even travel..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle, like a golden bracelet. 
"Whomever I touch, I send back to the earth from whence he came," the snake spoke again. "But you are innocent and true, and you come from a star..." 
The little prince made no reply.
"You move me to pity - you are so weak on this Earth made of granite," the snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet. I can - "
"Oh! I understand you very well," said the little prince. "But why do you always speak in riddles?"
"I solve them all," said the snake.
And they were both silent.   
  

Chapter 18
1.The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower (пересек пустыню и встретил только один цветок). 
It was a flower with three petals (это был цветок с тремя лепестками), a flower of no account at all (ничего особенного собой не представляющий). 
1.The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower. 
It was a flower with three petals, a flower of no account at all.
 
2."Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men (а где люди)?" the little prince asked, politely. 
The flower had once seen a caravan passing (цветок однажды видел проходящий мимо караван). 
"Men?" she echoed (люди – отозвался цветок). "I think there are six or seven of them in existence (думаю, шестеро или семеро их существует). I saw them, several years ago (видел их, несколько лет тому назад). But one never knows where to find them (но никто не знает, где их найти). The wind blows them away (ветер их унес). They have no roots (у них нет корней), and that makes their life very difficult (это усложняет им жизнь: досл. это делает их жизнь очень тяжелой)."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower. 
2."Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men?" the little prince asked, politely. 
The flower had once seen a caravan passing. 
"Men?" she echoed. "I think there are six or seven of them in existence. I saw them, several years ago. But one never knows where to find them. The wind blows them away. They have no roots, and that makes their life very difficult."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower.

Chapter 19
1. After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain (после этого маленький принц взобрался на высокую гору). The only mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees (единственными горами, ему известными, были три вулкана, которые доходили ему до колен). And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool (использовал потухший вулкан как скамеечку для ног). "From a mountain as high as this one (с такой высокой горы, как эта)," he said to himself (сказал себе), "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance (я смогу увидеть всю планету одним взглядом), and all the people..."
1. After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain. The only mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees. And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool. "From a mountain as high as this one," he said to himself, "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance, and all the people..."  
 
2. But he saw nothing (ничего не увидел), save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles (из-за горных вершин, острых, как иглы). 
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning - Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you (ты кто)?" said the little prince.
"Who are you - Who are you - Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone (будь моим другом, я так одинок)," he said.
"I am all alone - all alone - all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet (странная планета)!" he thought (подумал). 
"It is altogether dry (она и сухая), and altogether pointed (и остроконечная), and altogether harsh and forbidding (и суровая и пугающая одновременно). And the people have no imagination (и людей никакого воображения). They repeat whatever one says to them (они повторяют все, что им ни скажи)... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak (она всегда говорила первая)..." 
2. But he saw nothing, save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles. 
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning - Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you?" said the little prince.
"Who are you - Who are you - Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone," he said.
"I am all alone - all alone - all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet!" he thought. 
"It is altogether dry, and altogether pointed, and altogether harsh and forbidding. And the people have no imagination. They repeat whatever one says to them... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak..."

Chapter 20
1. But it happened (но случилось так) that after walking for a long time (после долгого хождения) through sand, and rocks, and snow (по песках, камнях, снегах: досл. сквозь пески…), the little prince at last (наконец) came upon a road (дорога). And all roads lead to the abodes (жилище) of men.
"Good morning," he said. 
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses (сад, весь в цветущих розах).
"Good morning," said the roses. 
The little prince gazed (пристально поглядел, «уставился») at them. They all looked like (похожи на) his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck (требовал, пораженный).
"We are roses," the roses said. 
And he was overcome with sadness (его одолела грусть). His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind (единственная такая) in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them (их было здесь пять тысяч), all alike (все одинаковые), in one single garden (в одном единственном саду)! 
1. But it happened that after walking for a long time through sand, and rocks, and snow, the little prince at last came upon a road. And all roads lead to the abodes of men.
"Good morning," he said. 
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses.
"Good morning," said the roses. 
The little prince gazed at them. They all looked like his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck.
"We are roses," the roses said. 
And he was overcome with sadness. His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them, all alike, in one single garden!
 
2. "She would be very much annoyed (она была бы очень раздосадована)," he said to himself, "if she should see that (увидь она это)... she would cough most dreadfully (кашляла бы еще ужаснее), and she would pretend that she was dying (притворялась бы, что умирает), to avoid being laughed at (чтобы избежать насмешки). And I should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life (а я притворялся бы, что ухаживаю за ней, спасая ее: досл. ухаживал бы ее назад к жизни) - for if I did not do that, to humble (смириться) myself also, she would really allow herself to die (позволит себе умереть)..." 
Then he went on with his reflections (продолжал размышлять): 
"I thought that I was rich (мне казалось, я богат), with a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose (все, что у меня было — это обычная роза). A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees (три вулкана, мне по колени)- and one of them perhaps (возможно) extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince (не такой уж я великий принц: досл. это не делает меня очень большим принцем)..." 
And he lay down in the grass and cried (лег на траву и заплакал). 
2. "She would be very much annoyed," he said to himself, "if she should see that... she would cough most dreadfully, and she would pretend that she was dying, to avoid being laughed at. And I should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life - for if I did not do that, to humble myself also, she would really allow herself to die..." 
Then he went on with his reflections: 
"I thought that I was rich, with a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose. A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees - and one of them perhaps extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince..." 
And he lay down in the grass and cried. 

Chapter 21
1. It was then that the fox appeared (потом появилась лиса: досл. это было потом, что лиса появилась).
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw nothing (несмотря на то, что никого вокруг не видел: досл. когда он оборачивался по кругу он видел ничего).
"I am right here (я прямо здесь)," the voice (голос) said, "under the apple tree (под яблоней)."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added (добавил), "You are very pretty to look at (ты хорошенький(ая): досл. ты очень миленький смотреть на)." 
1. It was then that the fox appeared.
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw nothing.
"I am right here," the voice said, "under the apple tree."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added, "You are very pretty to look at." 
 
2. "I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me (поиграй со мной: досл. подойди и поиграй со мной)," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy (несчастен)."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed (меня не приручили)."
"Ah! Please excuse me (извини)," said the little prince. 
But, after some thought (немного подумав: досл. после нескольких мыслей), he added:
"What does that mean (что это значит) - 'tame'?"
"You do not live here (ты здесь не живешь)," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for (что ты ищешь: досл. что это есть, что ты ищешь)?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns (ружья, пистолеты), and they hunt (охотятся). It is very disturbing (очень беспокоит). They also raise chickens (разводят цыплят). These are their only interests (это их единственное занятие (интерес)). Are you looking for chickens (ищешь цыплят)?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends (ищу друзей). What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected (это действие, которое часто игнорируют)," said the fox. It means to establish ties (установить связи)."
"'To establish ties'?"
"Just that (именно)," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more (для меня ты все еще ничего больше) than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys (как маленький мальчик, точно такой же, как и тысячи других). And I have no need of you (ты мне не нужен: досл. у меня неь необходимости тебя). And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other (мы будем друг другу нужны). To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand (начинаю понимать)," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things (на земле всякое бывает: досл. кто-то может увидеть всякие виды вещей)."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince. 
The fox seemed perplexed (озадаченной), and very curious (заинтересованной).
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters (охотники) on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect (ничто не совершенно)," sighed the fox.
2. "I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed."
"Ah! Please excuse me," said the little prince. 
But, after some thought, he added:
"What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"You do not live here," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns, and they hunt. It is very disturbing. They also raise chickens. These are their only interests. Are you looking for chickens?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends. What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected," said the fox. It means to establish ties."
"'To establish ties'?"
"Just that," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys. And I have no need of you. And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince. 
The fox seemed perplexed, and very curious.
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect," sighed the fox.  
 
3. But he came back to his idea (он вернулся к своей мысли). 
"My life is very monotonous (однообразна)," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike (все цыплята одинаковы), and all the men are just alike. And, in consequence (в результате), I am a little bored (мне немного скучно). But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun came to shine on my life (все равно, что солнце озарит мою жизнь: досл. солнце придет осветить). I shall know the sound of a step (буду знать звук шагов) that will be different from all the others (которые будут отличаться от всех остальных). Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground (будут заставлять меня прятаться: досл. отошлют меня спешить обратно под землю). Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow (твои же будут звучать для меня, как музыка за пределами моей норы). And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder (видишь хлебные поля вон там внизу)? I do not eat bread (хлеб). Wheat is of no use to me (мне пшеница не нужна: досл. от пшеницы мне никакой пользы). The wheat fields have nothing to say to me (ни о чем мне не говорят). And that is sad (печально). But you have hair that is the colour of gold (золотистые волосы). Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you (будет напоминать о тебе: досл. будет приносить меня назад к мыслям о тебе). And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat (я полюблю слушать ветер в пшенице)..." 
The fox gazed (пристально смотреть) at the little prince, for a long time. 
"Please - tame me!" he said.
"I want to (я хочу), very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time (у меня мало времени). I have friends to discover (найти друзей: досл. открыть друзей (как открыть новый остров)), and a great many things to understand (много понять)."
"One only understands the things that one tames (мы понимаем только то, что приручили)," said the fox. "Men have no more time to understand anything (у людей нет времени что-либо понимать). They buy things all ready made at the shops (покупают готовое в магазине). But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship (нет такого магазина, в котором можно купить дружбу), and so men have no friends any more (потому у людей больше нет друзей). If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient (терпеливый)," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little distance from me - like that - in the grass (сначала сядешь недалеко от меня — как сейчас — на траве). I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye (буду поглядывать: досл. смотреть уголками глаз), and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings (слова приводят к непониманию: досл. слова — источник непонимания). But you will sit a little closer (немного ближе) to me, every day..." 
The next day the little prince came back (вернулся). 
"It would have been better (было бы лучше) to come back at the same hour (возвращаться в одно и то же время)," said the fox. 
"If, for example (например), you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy (тогда в три часа я уже буду счастливым). I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances (буду счастливее и счастливее, когда будет приближаться время). At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying (уже буду волноваться) and jumping about («прыгать от нетерпения»). I shall show you how happy I am (покажу, как я счастлив)! But if you come at just any time (в разное время), I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you (в котором часу мое сердце будет готово приветствовать тебя)... One must observe the proper rites (нужно соблюдать должную церемонию)..."
"What is a rite (церемония)?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected (это тоже действие, которое часто игнорируется)," said the fox. "They are what make one day different from other days (то, что делает один день не таким, как другой), one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far as the vineyards (могу добраться до винного двора). But if the hunters danced at just any time (если будут танцевать в разное время), every day would be like every other day (каждый день будет такой, как и другие), and I should never have any vacation (отдых, каникулы) at all." 
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near (пришло время отбытия) - "Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry (заплачу)."
"It is your own fault (твоя собственная вина)," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of harm (я не желал тебе зла: досл. никогда не хотел какого-либо вида вреда); but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry (почти плачешь: досл. собираешься плакать)!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all (это не принесло тебе ничего хорошего)!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the colour of the wheat fields (хотя бы цвет пшеничного поля)." And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses (посмотри на розы). You will understand now that yours is unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret (секретный подарок)." 
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. 
"You are not at all like my rose (вы не такие, как моя роза)," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew him (как моя лиса, когда я ее впервые увидел). He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world." 
And the roses were very much embarrassed (смутились). 
"You are beautiful, but you are empty (пусты)," he went on. "One could not die for you (ради вас никто не умрет). To be sure, an ordinary passerby (обычный прохожий) would think that my rose looked just like you - the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone (сама по себе) she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered (ее я поливал); because it is she that I have put under the glass globe (ее помещал под стеклянный колпак); because it is she that I have sheltered behind the screen (прикрывал ширмой); because it is for her (для нее) that I have killed (уничтожил) the caterpillars (гусениц) (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies (за исключением двух или трех, которых мы сохранили, дабы они стали бабочками)); because it is she that I have listened to (ее я слушал), when she grumbled (ворчала), or boasted (хвасталась), or even sometimes when she said nothing (а иногда ничего не говорила). 
Because she is my rose.
3. But he came back to his idea. 
"My life is very monotonous," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike, and all the men are just alike. And, in consequence, I am a little bored. But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun came to shine on my life . I shall know the sound of a step that will be different from all the others. Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground. Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow. And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder? I do not eat bread. Wheat is of no use to me. The wheat fields have nothing to say to me. And that is sad. But you have hair that is the colour of gold. Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you. And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat..." 
The fox gazed at the little prince, for a long time. 
"Please - tame me!" he said.
"I want to, very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time. I have friends to discover, and a great many things to understand."
"One only understands the things that one tames," said the fox. "Men have no more time to understand anything. They buy things all ready made at the shops. But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship, and so men have no friends any more. If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little distance from me - like that - in the grass. I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye, and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings. But you will sit a little closer to me, every day..." 
The next day the little prince came back. 
"It would have been better to come back at the same hour," said the fox. 
"If, for example, you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy. I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances. At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying and jumping about. I shall show you how happy I am! But if you come at just any time, I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you... One must observe the proper rites..."
"What is a rite?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected," said the fox. "They are what make one day different from other days, one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far as the vineyards. But if the hunters danced at just any time, every day would be like every other day, and I should never have any vacation at all." 
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near - "Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry."
"It is your own fault," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of harm; but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the color of the wheat fields." And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses. You will understand now that yours is unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret." 
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. 
"You are not at all like my rose," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew him. He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world." 
And the roses were very much embarrassed. 
"You are beautiful, but you are empty," he went on. "One could not die for you. To be sure, an ordinary passerby would think that my rose looked just like you - the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered; because it is she that I have put under the glass globe; because it is she that I have sheltered behind the screen; because it is for her that I have killed the caterpillars (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies); because it is she that I have listened to, when she grumbled, or boasted, or even sometimes when she said nothing. 
Because she is my rose.  
 
And he went back to meet the fox.
"Goodbye," he said.
"Goodbye," said the fox. "And now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye."
"What is essential is invisible to the eye," the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. "It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so important."
"It is the time I have wasted for my rose - " said the little prince, so that he would be sure to remember.
"Men have forgotten this truth," said the fox. "But you must not forget it. You become responsible, forever, for what you have tamed. You are responsible for your rose..." 
"I am responsible for my rose," the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. 

Текст адаптирует Юлия Федорчук sono_io@inbox.ru 

Chapter 1
1. Once when I was six years old (когда-то, когда мне было шесть лет: досл. Я был шесть лет стар; «be – was, were – been» – быть) I saw a magnificent picture in a book (я видел замечательную картинку в книжке: «see – saw – seen» – видеть), called True Stories from Nature (называемой Правдивые Истории из Природы: «саll – called» – звать, называть, «from» – из), about the primeval forest (о древних лесах). It was a picture of a boa constrictor (это была картинка удава) in the act of swallowing an animal (глотающего животное: досл. в процессе глотания животного). Here is a copy of the drawing (это копия рисунка: досл. здесь есть копия; «here» – здесь).
 

1. Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing.
2. In the book it said (в книге говорилось: досл. это сказано; «say – said» – говорить): "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it (удавы глотают свою добычу целиком, не пережевывая: досл. без жевания её). After that they are not able to move (после этого они не в состоянии двигаться), and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion (и они спят в течение 6 месяцев, в которых они нуждаются для переваривания пищи: «through» – сквозь, «need» – нуждаться, сравни «to be in need of» – нуждаться в чем-то)." I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle (я задумался глубоко тогда над приключениями в джунглях: «ponder» – обдумывать). And after some work with a colored pencil (и поработав цветным каранлашем: досл. и после некоторой работы с цветным карандашем) I succeeded in making my first drawing (я нарисовал мой первый рисунок: досл. я преуспел в изготовлении; «make» – делать, «draw – drew – drawn» – рисовать, «drawing» – рисунок). My Drawing Number One (Номер Один). It looked like this (он выглядел так: досл. он выглядел, как это): 
 
2. In the book it said: "Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing it. After that they are not able to move, and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion." I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. And after some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing. My Drawing Number One. It looked like this:
3. I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups (я показал свое творение взрослым: «show – showed» – показывать), and asked them whether the drawing frightened them (и спросил у них, не пугает ли рисунок их). But they answered (ответили): "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat? (пугает? почему шляпа должна пугать: досл. почему должен кто-то один быть напуганным шляпой)". My drawing was not a picture of a hat (мой рисунок не был изображением шляпы). It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant (слон). But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it (но поскольку взрослые не были способны это понять: «since» – с тех пор), I made another drawing (я сделал другой рисунок): I drew the inside of the boa constrictor (удава изнутри: «inside» – то, что внутри), so that the grown-ups could see it clearly (так, чтобы взрослые могли видеть это ясно). They always need to have things explained (им всегда нужно объяснять: досл. они всегда нуждаются в том, чтобы вещи были объяснены; «explain – explained» – объяснять). My Drawing Number Two looked like this: 
 
3. I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the drawing frightened them. But they answered: "Frighten? Why should any one be frightened by a hat?" 
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant. But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it, I made another drawing: I drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the grown-ups could see it clearly. They always need to have things explained. My Drawing Number Two looked like this:
4. The grown-ups' response, this time (ответом взрослых на этот раз: досл. это время), was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors (был совет оставить мое рисование удавов: досл. было посоветовать мне отложить в сторону мое рисование удавов), whether from the inside or the outside (снаружи), and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar (и посвятить себя вместо этого географии, истории, арифметике и грамматике). That is why (вот почему), at the age of six (в возрасте 6 лет), I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter (я отказался от того, что могло бы быть замечательной карьерой художника: «give – gave – given» – давать, «give up» – отказываться). I had been disheartened by the failure (я огорчился провалом) of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves (сами), and it is tiresome for children (это (есть) утомительно для детей) to be always and forever explaining things to them (всегда и постоянно объяснять вещи для них: «always» – всегда, «forever» – навсегда). 
4. The grown-ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the outside, and devote myself instead to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar. That is why, at the age of six, I gave up what might have been a magnificent career as a painter. I had been disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups never understand anything by themselves, and it is tiresome for children to be always and forever explaining things to them.
5. So then (поэтому) I chose another profession (я выбрал другую профессию: «choose – chose – chosen» – выбирать), and learned to pilot airplanes (и научился управлять самолётом: «learn – learned» – учиться). I have flown a little over all parts of the world (я летал понемногу над всеми частями мира: «a little» – немножко; «fly – flew – flown» – летать); and it is true (правда) that geography has been very useful to me (была очень полезна для меня: «useful» – полный полезности). At a glance (едва взглянув: «glance» – мимолётный взгляд) I can distinguish China from Arizona (я мог отличить Китай от Аризоны). If one gets lost in the night (если потеряешься ночью: досл. если один (кто-то) получит потерю ночью), such knowledge is valuable (такое знание очень ценно). 
In the course of this life (в течение моей жизни: «course» – направление, ход, курс) I have had a great many encounters with a great many people (я имел очень много встреч с очень многими людьми) who have been concerned with matters of consequence (которые заботились о последствиях). I have lived a great deal among grown-ups (я необычайно долго жил среди взрослых: «a great deal» – необычайно много). I have seen them intimately, close at hand (я видел их вблизи (близко), рядом под рукой). And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them (и это не улучшило моё мнение о них). 
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted (когда бы я не встречал одного из них, который казался мне в общем здравомыслящим: «at all» – в общем, «clear-sighted» – «чистовидящий»), I tried the experiment (я пробовал эксперимент) of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept (который всегда при мне: досл. который я всегда держал). I would try to find out (я пытался выяснить: «to find out» – выяснить), so, if this was a person of true understanding (была ли эта личность действительно понимающая: досл. личность правильного понимания). But, whoever it was (но кто бы это ни был), he, or she, would always say (он или она всегда говорили): "That is a hat (это шляпа)." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars (после этого я никогда не говорил с этим человеком об удавах, древних лесах, или звёздах). I would bring myself down to his level (я опускался до их уровня: досл. приносил себя вниз к их уровню). I would talk to him about bridge (бридж), and golf (гольф), and politics (политику), and neckties (галстуки). And the grown-up would be greatly pleased (очень довольны) to have met such a sensible man (что встретили такого понимающего человека: «meet – met» – встретить, «sensible» – чувствительный).
5. So then I chose another profession, and learned to pilot airplanes. I have flown a little over all parts of the world; and it is true that geography has been very useful to me. At a glance I can distinguish China from Arizona. If one gets lost in the night, such knowledge is valuable. 
In the course of this life I have had a great many encounters with a great many people who have been concerned with matters of consequence. I have lived a great deal among grown-ups. I have seen them intimately, close at hand. And that hasn't much improved my opinion of them. 
Whenever I met one of them who seemed to me at all clear-sighted, I tried the experiment of showing him my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept. I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true understanding. But, whoever it was, he, or she, would always say: "That is a hat." Then I would never talk to that person about boa constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars. I would bring myself down to his level. I would talk to him about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties. And the grown-up would be greatly pleased to have met such a sensible man. 
 
Chapter 2
1. So I lived my life alone (так я и жил мою жизнь один: «live – lived» – жить), without anyone that I could really talk to (без кого-то, с кем я действительно мог поговорить: «can – could» – мочь, «talked to» – говорить с кем-то), until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago (пока не потерпел крушение в Сахаре, шесть лет назад: досл. пока не имел аварию с моим самолётом в Пустыне Сахара). Something  was broken in my engine (что-то поломалось в моём двигателе: «brake – broke – broken» – биться, ломаться, «some + thing» – какая-то вещь = что-то). And as (поскольку) I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers (ни механика, ни пассажиров: «neither… nor» – ни… ни), I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone (я взялся за ремонт сам: досл. я взял себя попытаться (устранить) тяжёлый ремонт весь (совсем) один; «set to» – взяться (за работу)). It was a question of life or death (вопрос жизни и смерти) for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week (я имел едва ли достаточно питьевой воды до конца недели). 
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand (первую ночь, тогда, я пошёл спать на песке), a thousand miles from any human habitation (за тысячу миль от какого-либо человеческого поселения: «to habituate» – обитать). I was more isolated (я был более изолирован) than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean (чем потерпевший крушение моряк на плоту посреди океана: «shipwrecked» = «ship»+«wrecked»= «корабль»+ «повреждённый», «raft» – плот). Thus (поэтому) you can imagine (представить) my amazement (изумление), at sunrise (на заре: «sunrise»= «sun»+ «rise» = «солнце»+ «вставать, подниматься»), when I was awakened by an odd little voice (когда я был разбужен странным голоском: «little voice» – маленький голос). It said (сказал):
"If you please - draw me a sheep! (будь так добр – нарисуй мне ягнёнка)"
"What! (Что?)"
"Draw me a sheep!" 
I jumped to my feet (я вскочил: досл. прыгнул на мои ноги), completely thunderstruck (совершенно ошарашенный: «thunderstruck» = «thunder»+ «struck» – «молния» + «удар»). I blinked my eyes hard (усиленно замигал: досл. я мигал моими глазами тяжело). I looked carefully all around me (тщательно огляделся: досл. смотрел кругом меня). And I saw a most extraordinary small person (и я увидел чрезвычайно необычного человечка: досл. маленькую персону), who stood there examining me (стоял изучая меня) with great seriousness (серьёзностью). Here you may see (вы можете видеть) the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him (который я позже смог нарисовать с него). But my drawing is certainly (конечно) very much less charming (намного меньше элегантный) than its model. 
 

1. So I lived my life alone, without anyone that I could really talk to, until I had an accident with my plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago. Something was broken in my engine. And as I had with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers, I set myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone. It was a question of life or death for me: I had scarcely enough drinking water to last a week. 
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a thousand miles from any human habitation. I was more isolated than a shipwrecked sailor on a raft in the middle of the ocean. Thus you can imagine my amazement, at sunrise, when I was awakened by an odd little voice. It said:
"If you please - draw me a sheep!"
"What!"
"Draw me a sheep!" 
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I blinked my eyes hard. I looked carefully all around me. And I saw a most extraordinary small person, who stood there examining me with great seriousness. Here you may see the best portrait that, later, I was able to make of him. But my drawing is certainly very much less charming than its model. 
2. That, however, is not my fault (это, все же, не моя вина). The grown-ups discouraged (здесь: разуверили) me in my painter's career (карьере художника) when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything (и никогда не учился рисовать что-либо), except (кроме) boas from the outside and boas from the inside. 
Now I stared (пристально смотрел) at this sudden apparition (внезапное видение) with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment (с глазами на выкате от удивления: досл. с глазами прямо начинающими из моей головы). Remember (помните), I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region (я разбился в пустыне, за тысячи миль от какого-либо заселённого региона). And yet (и все же) my little man seemed (казался) neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands (ни блуждающим неуверенно среди песков), nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear (ни теряющим сознание от усталости или голода или жажды или страха). Nothing about him (ничто в нём: досл. о нём) gave any suggestion (давало какие-либо подозрения) of a child lost (ребёнок потерялся) in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last (когда наконец-то) I was able to speak (говорить), I said to him (ему): 
"But – what are you doing here? (но – что ты здесь делаешь)" 
And in answer he repeated (в ответ он повторил: «repeat – repeated» – повторять), very slowly (медленно), as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence (так как если бы он говорил о деле большой важности): 
"If you please – draw me a sheep..." 
When a mystery (загадка, тайна) is too overpowering (пересиливающая, подавляющая), one dare not disobey (никто не посмеет не подчиниться: досл. один (кто-то) не посмеет). Absurd as it might seem to me (глупо, как это могло мне казаться), a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death (в опасности смерти), I took out (вынул) of my pocket (карман) a sheet of paper (лист бумаги) and my fountain-pen (авторучку). But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated (как мои занятия были сосредоточены) on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (пареньку: досл. маленькому парню, «chap» – трещина, но разг. «парень») (a little crossly (сердитый), too) that I did not know how to draw (как рисовать). He answered me: "That doesn't matter (это неважно). Draw me a sheep..." 
But I had never (никогда) drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures (одну из двух) I had drawn so often (так часто). It was that (это была та) of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded (поражён) to hear the little fellow (парень) greet it with (приветствовал её с),
"No, no, no! I do not want (я не хочу) an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature (очень опасное создание), and an elephant is very cumbersome (громоздкий). Where I live (где я живу), everything (все: «everything» = «every» + «thing»= «все»+ «вещь») is very small. What I need is a sheep (что мне нужно, так это ягнёнок: досл. что мне нужно есть ягнёнок). Draw me a sheep." 
So then I made a drawing (и вот я нарисовал: досл. сделал рисунок). 
2. That, however, is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged me in my painter's career when I was six years old, and I never learned to draw anything, except boas from the outside and boas from the inside. 
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment. Remember, I had crashed in the desert a thousand miles from any inhabited region. And yet my little man seemed neither to be straying uncertainly among the sands, nor to be fainting from fatigue or hunger or thirst or fear. Nothing about him gave any suggestion of a child lost in the middle of the desert, a thousand miles from any human habitation. When at last I was able to speak, I said to him: 
"But - what are you doing here?" 
And in answer he repeated, very slowly, as if he were speaking of a matter of great consequence: 
"If you please -- draw me a sheep..." 
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not disobey. Absurd as it might seem to me, a thousand miles from any human habitation and in danger of death, I took out of my pocket a sheet of paper and my fountain-pen. But then I remembered how my studies had been concentrated on geography, history, arithmetic, and grammar, and I told the little chap (a little crossly, too) that I did not know how to draw. He answered me: "That doesn't matter. Draw me a sheep..." 
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him one of the two pictures I had drawn so often. It was that of the boa constrictor from the outside. And I was astounded to hear the little fellow greet it with,
"No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature, and an elephant is very cumbersome. Where I live, everything is very small. What I need is a sheep. Draw me a sheep." 
So then I made a drawing. 
 
3. He looked at it carefully (посмотрел пристально), then he said:
"No. This sheep is already (уже) very sickly (болезненный). Make me another (другой)." 
So I made another drawing. 

3. He looked at it carefully, then he said:
"No. This sheep is already very sickly. Make me another." 
So I made another drawing.
 
4. My friend smiled gently and indulgently (мой друг улыбнулся мягко и неопределённо).
"You see yourself, (ты видишь сам)" he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram (баран). It has horns (у него рога)." 
So then I did my drawing over once more (ещё раз). 

4. My friend smiled gently and indulgently.
"You see yourself," he said, "that this is not a sheep. This is a ram. It has horns." 
So then I did my drawing over once more. 

 
4. But it was rejected (отвергнут) too, just like the others (точно так же, как и другие). 
"This one is too old (этот слишком стар). I want a sheep that will live a long time (будет жить долгое время)." 
By this time (на этот раз: досл. тем временем) my patience was exhausted (моё терпение истощилось), because I was in a hurry (спешил: досл. был в спешке) to start taking my engine apart (демонтировать двигатель). So I tossed off («toss» – «подбрасывать») this drawing. And I threw out an explanation with it (и выбросил объяснение с ним). 
"This is only his box (только его коробка). The sheep you asked for is inside (ягнёнок, о котором ты просил, внутри: «to ask for» – «просить о чем-либо»)."

4. But it was rejected too, just like the others. 
"This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a long time." 
By this time my patience was exhausted, because I was in a hurry to start taking my engine apart. So I tossed off this drawing. And I threw out an explanation with it. 
"This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is inside." 
 
 
5. I was very surprised (удивлён) to see a light break over the face (как свет озарил лицо: досл. свет пробился на лицо) of my young judge (юного судьи): 
"That is exactly the way I wanted it (он именно такой, как я хотел: досл. это точно такой путь, как я его хотел)! Do you think (думаешь) that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass (этому ягнёнку нужно будет большое количество травы)?"
"Why (почему)?" 
"Because where I live everything is very small... (потому что, где я живу, всё очень маленькое)" 
"There (там) will surely (наверняка) be enough (достаточно) grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you (я нарисовал очень маленького ягнёнка: досл. это очень маленький ягнёнок, что я дал тебе)." 
He bent (наклонил) his head (голову) over the drawing:
"Not so small that – Look (не такой уж и маленький – посмотри)! He has gone to sleep... (он ушёл спать)"
And that is how (и вот так) I made the acquaintance (познакомился: досл. сделал знакомство) of the little prince. 
5. I was very surprised to see a light break over the face of my young judge: 
"That is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think that this sheep will have to have a great deal of grass?"
"Why?" 
"Because where I live everything is very small..." 
"There will surely be enough grass for him," I said. "It is a very small sheep that I have given you." 
He bent his head over the drawing:
"Not so small that - Look! He has gone to sleep..."
And that is how I made the acquaintance of the little prince.

Chapter 3
1. It took me a long time (забрало у меня много времени) to learn where he came from (откуда он). The little prince, who asked me so many questions (который много спрашивал: досл. спрашивал много вопросов), never seemed to hear (никогда казалось слышал: в отличие о русского, в английском нет двойного возражения, сравни: он никогда не слышал) the ones I asked him (те, которые задавал я: «ones» – означает «questions», оно заменяет их в предложении, дабы не было тавтологии). It was from words dropped by chance that (это было со слов, брошенных случайно: «to drop – dropped» – падать, бросать, капля; «by chance» – «случайно»), little by little (понемножку), everything was revealed to me (всё было обнаружено мне: «reveal – revealed» – «обнаруживать»).
The first time (когда впервые: досл. первое время) he saw my airplane (самолёт), for instance (например) (I shall not draw (не буду рисовать) my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me (это было бы слишком сложно для меня)), he asked me:
"What is that object (объект, штуковина)?"
"That is not an object. It flies (он летает). It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly (и я гордился тем, что могу его научить, что я могу летать: «to be proud» – гордиться, быть гордым). He cried out (выкрикнул, воскликнул), then (тогда):
"What (как)! You dropped down from the sky (ты упал с небес: досл. упал вниз)?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly (ответил скромно: «modest» – скромный).
"Oh! That is funny! (как забавно: досл. это есть забавно)"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter (рассмеялся: досл. разбился в чудный (красивый) раскат смеха), which irritated (разозлил: «to irritate – irritated» – злить, раздражать) me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously (мне нравится, когда к моим несчастьям относятся серьёзно: досл. мои несчастья берутся серьёзно: «misfortune» – отсутствие счастья).
Then he added (добавил: «to add – added» – добавить, дополнить):
"So you, too, come from the sky (так ты тоже пришёл с неба)! Which is your planet? (с какой планеты: досл. которая есть твоя планета)"
At that moment (в тот момент) I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence (пролился свет на непостижимую тайну его присутствия: досл. я поймал проблеск света в непроницаемой тайне); and I demanded (потребовал: «to demand – demanded» – требовать), abruptly (резко):
"Do you come from another planet (другой планеты)?"
But he did not reply (но он не ответил). He tossed (наклонил) his head gently (мягко, осторожно), without taking his eyes from my plane (не отрывая глаз от моего самолёта: досл. без «забирания» его глаз):
"It is true (действительно: досл. это есть правда) that on that you can't have come from very far away... (что на этом ты не мог прийти из далека)"
And he sank into a reverie (задумался: досл. погрузился в мечтательность), which lasted a long time (которая продолжалась долгое время). Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket (вытянув моего ягнёнка из его (т. е. своего) кармана), he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure (он погрузился в созерцание своего сокровища: досл. спрятал, закопал себя в созерцание).
You can imagine (вы можете представить) how my curiosity was aroused (любопытство возросло) by this half-confidence about the "other planets"(этим полупризнанием о «других планетах»). I made a great effort (я попытался: досл. сделал большое усилие), therefore (следовательно), to find out more on this subject (узнать побольше по этому поводу: «to find out» – узнать, выяснить). "My little man, where do you come from (откуда ты: досл. откуда ты пришёл)? What is this 'where I live,' (что это за «где я живу») of which you speak (о котором ты говоришь)? Where do you want to take your sheep (куда ты хочешь забрать своего ягнёнка)?"
After a reflective silence (гулкой тишины: досл. отражающей тишины) he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me (что хорошо в коробке, которую ты мне дал: досл. вещь, которая так хороша, о коробке, которую ты дал мне) is that at night he can use it as his house (так это то, что ночью он сможет использовать её как свой дом)."
"That is so (это так). And if you are good (если ты добрый) I will give you a string (я дам тебе тесьму (верёвку)), too, so that you can tie him during the day (сможешь привязывать его на протяжение дня: «to tie – tied» – связывать), and a post (здесь: колышек, но имеет также  значения «сообщение», «посылать») to tie him to (к которому его привязать)."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer (казалось был шокирован этим предложением):
"Tie him (привязывать его)! What a queer idea (что за странная идея)!"
"But if you don't tie him (если ты его не привяжешь)," I said, "he will wander off somewhere (зайдёт куда-то: «to wander – wandered» – бродить), and get lost (потеряется: досл. получит потерю)."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter (ещё раз рассмеялся):
"But where do you think he would go? (но куда, по твоему мнению, он мог бы пойти)"
"Anywhere (куда угодно: «anywhere»= «any+where» = «любой»+ «где»). Straight ahead of him (прямо перед собой)."
Then the little prince said, earnestly (серьёзно):
"That doesn't matter (это неважно). Where I live, everything is so small (где я живу, всё очень маленькое)!
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness (немножко печально: досл. с возможно намёком на печаль), he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far... (идя прямо, никто не зайдёт далеко)"

1. It took me a long time to learn where he came from. The little prince, who asked me so many questions, never seemed to hear the ones I asked him. It was from words dropped by chance that, little by little, everything was revealed to me.
The first time he saw my airplane, for instance (I shall not draw my airplane; that would be much too complicated for me), he asked me:
"What is that object?"
"That is not an object. It flies. It is an airplane. It is my airplane."
And I was proud to have him learn that I could fly. He cried out, then:
"What! You dropped down from the sky?"
"Yes," I answered, modestly.
"Oh! That is funny!"
And the little prince broke into a lovely peal of laughter, which irritated me very much. I like my misfortunes to be taken seriously.
Then he added:
"So you, too, come from the sky! Which is your planet?"
At that moment I caught a gleam of light in the impenetrable mystery of his presence; and I demanded, abruptly:
"Do you come from another planet?"
But he did not reply. He tossed his head gently, without taking his eyes from my plane:
"It is true that on that you can't have come from very far away..."
And he sank into a reverie, which lasted a long time. Then, taking my sheep out of his pocket, he buried himself in the contemplation of his treasure.
You can imagine how my curiosity was aroused by this half-confidence about the "other planets." I made a great effort, therefore, to find out more on this subject. "My little man, where do you come from? What is this 'where I live,' of which you speak? Where do you want to take your sheep?"
After a reflective silence he answered:
"The thing that is so good about the box you have given me is that at night he can use it as his house."
"That is so. And if you are good I will give you a string, too, so that you can tie him during the day, and a post to tie him to."
But the little prince seemed shocked by this offer:
"Tie him! What a queer idea!"
"But if you don't tie him," I said, "he will wander off somewhere, and get lost."
My friend broke into another peal of laughter:
"But where do you think he would go?"
"Anywhere. Straight ahead of him."
Then the little prince said, earnestly:
"That doesn't matter. Where I live, everything is so small!
And, with perhaps a hint of sadness, he added:
"Straight ahead of him, nobody can go very far..." 
 
 

Chapter 4
1. I had thus (таким образом) learned a second (второй) fact of great importance (факт большой важности): this was that (это было то) the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house (едва ли больше за дом)! 
But that did not really (вправду) surprise (удивило) me much. I knew very well (знал очень хорошо: «to know – knew» – знать) that in addition (в дополнение) to the great (больших) planets – such as (таких как) the Earth (Земля), Jupiter, Mars, Venus (Венера) – to which we have given names (которым были даны имена), there are (есть: досл. там есть) also hundreds of others (также сотни других), some of which (некоторые из которых) are so small that one has a hard time seeing them (что их тяжело увидеть: досл. один имеет тяжёлое время видя их) through (сквозь, через) the telescope. When an astronomer discovers (когда астрономы открывают: «to discover» – открывать в значении «делать открытие») one of these (одну из них) he does not give it a name, but only a number (но только номер). He might call it (он может назвать её), for example (для примера), "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason (у меня были серьёзные основания) to believe (верить) that the planet from which the little prince came (из которой пришёл маленький принц) is the asteroid known as (известный как) B-61. 
This asteroid has only once been seen (только раз был увиден) through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer (это был турецкий астроном), in 1909. 
1. I had thus learned a second fact of great importance: this was that the planet the little prince came from was scarcely any larger than a house! 
But that did not really surprise me much. I knew very well that in addition to the great planets –such as the Earth, Jupiter, Mars, Venus – to which we have given names, there are also hundreds of others, some of which are so small that one has a hard time seeing them through the telescope. When an astronomer discovers one of these he does not give it a name, but only a number. He might call it, for example, "Asteroid 325."
I have serious reason to believe that the planet from which the little prince came is the asteroid known as B-61. 
This asteroid has only once been seen through the telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer, in 1909.
 
2. On making his discovery (сделав открытие), the astronomer had presented it (представил его) to the International Astronomical Congress (Международному Астрономическому Конгрессу), in a great demonstration (с особой пышностью: досл. в большой демонстрации). But he was in Turkish costume (в турецком костюме), and so nobody would believe (никто не поверил) what he said (что он говорил). 
2. On making his discovery, the astronomer had presented it to the International Astronomical Congress, in a great demonstration. But he was in Turkish costume, and so nobody would believe what he said.
 
3. Grown-ups are like that (взрослые – они такие: досл. взрослые похожи на то)...
Fortunately (к счастью), however (тем не менее), for the reputation (для репутации) of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator made a law (сделал закон) that his subjects (подданные), under pain of death (под страхом смертной казни: досл. под болью смерти), should change to European costume (должны сменить одежду на европейский костюм).
3. Grown-ups are like that...
Fortunately, however, for the reputation of Asteroid B-612, a Turkish dictator made a law that his subjects, under pain of death, should change to European costume.
 
4. So in 1920 the astronomer gave (дал: досл. «to give – gave – given» – давать) his demonstration all over again (опять), dressed with impressive style and elegance (одет впечатляюще стильно и элегантно: досл. одет с впечатляющим стилем и элегантностью). And this time everybody accepted his report (приняли его доклад: «to accept – accepted» – принимать). 
If I have told you these details (если я рассказал вам эти детали) about the asteroid, and made a note of its number for you (и указал номер: досл. сделал замечание его номера для вас), it is on account (на счёт) of the grown-ups and their ways (взглядов: досл. дорог, путей). When you tell them (когда ты говоришь им) that you have made a new friend (что у тебя новый друг: досл. ты сделал нового друга), they never ask you (никогда не спросят) any questions about essential matters (по сути: досл. о существенных делах). They never say (никогда не скажут) to you, "What does his voice sound like (какой у него голос: досл. на что похоже звучит)? What games does he love best (какие игры он любит большего всего: «the best» – наилучший)? Does he collect butterflies (коллекционирует бабочек)?" Instead (взамен), they demand (требуют): "How old is he (сколько лет ему)? How many brothers has he (сколько братьев он имеет)? How much does he weigh (весит)? How much money does his father make (сколько денег зарабатывает его отец: досл. как много денег делает)?" Only from these figures (только по этим чертам, цифрам) do they think they have learned anything (что-либо) about him. 
If you were to say to the grown-ups (если бы вы сказали взрослым): "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick (из розового кирпича), with geraniums in the windows (геранью на окне) and doves on the roof (голубами на крыше)," they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all (они не в состоянии будут представить его вообще: досл. они не будут способны поймать идею этого дома в целом). You would have to say to them (вам нужно сказать им): "I saw a house that cost (стоит) $ 20,000." Then they would exclaim (они воскликнули бы):
"Oh, what a pretty (милый) house that is!" 
Just so (точно так же), you might (могли) say to them: 
"The proof (доказательство) that the little prince existed (существует: «to exist – existed» – существовать) is that he was charming (очарователен), that he laughed (смеялся), and that he was looking for a sheep (разыскивал ягнёнка: вообще-то «ягнёнок» – «lamb», а «sheep» – овца). If anybody wants a sheep (если кто-то хочет ягнёнка), that is a proof that he exists (это доказательство того, что он существует)."
And what good would it do to tell them that (и что толку было бы им это говорить: досл. что хорошего это сделало бы сказать им это)? They would shrug their shoulders (пожали бы плечами), and treat you like a child (воспримут тебя как ребёнка). But if you said to them: 
"The planet he came from (пришёл с) is Asteroid B-612," then they would be convinced (были бы убеждены), and leave you in peace from their questions (и перестали бы задавать вопросы: досл. оставили бы вас в спокойствии от их вопросов). 
They are like that (они такие). One must not hold it against them (не надо против них выступать: досл. один не должен держать это против них). Children should always show great forbearance toward (детям должно всегда проявлять огромную терпимость к) grown-up people (взрослые люди). 
But certainly (но конечно же), for us who understand life (для нас, понимающих жизнь: досл. для нас, кто понимает жизнь), figures are a matter of indifference (цифры не имеют значения: досл. цифры есть дело безразличия). I should have liked to begin (я хотел бы начать) this story (историю) in the fashion of the fairy-tales (в стиле сказки). I should have like to say (хотел бы сказать): "Once upon a time (как-то давным-давно) there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself (едва ли больше него самого), and who had need of a sheep... (которому нужен был ягнёнок)" 
To those (для тех) who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth (звучало бы правдоподобнее: досл. это дало бы больше воздуха правды) to my story. 
For I do not want any one (кто-то, любой) to read my book carelessly (беззаботно). I have suffered too much grief (мне было тяжело: досл. я страдал слишком много скорби) in setting down these memories (упорядочить воспоминания). Six years have already passed (6 лет уже прошло) since my friend went away from me (с тех пор, как мой друг покинул меня: досл. ушёл о меня), with his sheep. If I try to describe him here (если я пытаюсь его описать здесь), it is to make sure that I shall not forget him (чтобы быть уверенным, что я его не забуду). To forget a friend is sad (забывать друга – печально: «to forget – forgot» – забывать). Not every one has had a friend (не у каждого был друг). And if I forget him, I may become (могу стать) like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything (которые больше не заинтересованы ничем: «to be interested in anything» – быть заинтересованным в чём-либо) but figures... 
It is for that purpose (для этой цели), again (опять же), that I have bought (купил: «to buy – bought» – купить) a box of paints (коробку красок) and some pencils (карандаши). It is hard (тяжело) to take up (приниматься) drawing again at my age (в моём возрасте), when I have never made (никогда не делал) any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try (я конечно попытаюсь) to make my portraits as true to life as possible (по возможности нарисовать похожие портреты: досл. сделать портреты такими правдивыми к жизни как возможно). But I am not at all sure of success (но я в общем не уверен в успехе). One drawing goes along all right (получается совсем правильным), and another has no resemblance to its subject (другой не имеет схожести к его предмету). I make some errors (делаю некоторые ошибки), too, in the little prince's height (рост маленького принца): in one place (в одном месте) he is too tall (слишком высок) and in another too short (короток). And I feel some doubts (чувствую некоторые сомнения) about the color of his costume. So I fumble (нащупывать) along as best I can (хорошо, как только мог), now (сейчас) good, now bad, and I hope (надеюсь) generally fair-to-middling (в общем так себе). 
In certain more important details (в некоторых более важных деталях) I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something that will not be my fault (вина). My friend never explained anything to me (никогда ничего не объяснял). He thought (думал), perhaps (возможно), that I was like himself (что я такой, как он). But I, alas (увы), do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes (не знаю, как увидеть ягнёнка сквозь стены коробки). Perhaps I am a little like (немного похож) the grown-ups. I have had to grow old (я повзрослел). 
4. So in 1920 the astronomer gave his demonstration all over again, dressed with impressive style and elegance. And this time everybody accepted his report. 
If I have told you these details about the asteroid, and made a note of its number for you, it is on account of the grown-ups and their ways. When you tell them that you have made a new friend, they never ask you any questions about essential matters. They never say to you, "What does his voice sound like? What games does he love best? Does he collect butterflies?" Instead, they demand: "How old is he? How many brothers has he? How much does he weigh? How much money does his father make?" Only from these figures do they think they have learned anything about him. 
If you were to say to the grown-ups: "I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick, with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof," they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all. You would have to say to them: "I saw a house that cost $ 20,000." Then they would exclaim:
"Oh, what a pretty house that is!" 
Just so, you might say to them: 
"The proof that the little prince existed is that he was charming, that he laughed, and that he was looking for a sheep. If anybody wants a sheep, that is a proof that he exists."
And what good would it do to tell them that? They would shrug their shoulders, and treat you like a child. But if you said to them: 
"The planet he came from is Asteroid B-612," then they would be convinced, and leave you in peace from their questions. 
They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should always show great forbearance toward grown-up people. 
But certainly, for us who understand life, figures are a matter of indifference. I should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of the fairy-tales. I should have like to say: "Once upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself, and who had need of a sheep..." 
To those who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth to my story. 
For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered too much grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already passed since my friend went away from me, with his sheep. If I try to describe him here, it is to make sure that I shall not forget him. To forget a friend is sad. Not every one has had a friend. And if I forget him, I may become like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything but figures... 
It is for that purpose, again, that I have bought a box of paints and some pencils. It is hard to take up drawing again at my age, when I have never made any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the inside, since I was six. I shall certainly try to make my portraits as true to life as possible. But I am not at all sure of success. One drawing goes along all right, and another has no resemblance to its subject. I make some errors, too, in the little prince's height: in one place he is too tall and in another too short. And I feel some doubts about the color of his costume. So I fumble along as best I can, now good, now bad, and I hope generally fair-to-middling. 
In certain more important details I shall make mistakes, also. But that is something that will not be my fault. My friend never explained anything to me. He thought, perhaps, that I was like himself. But I, alas, do not know how to see sheep through t he walls of boxes. Perhaps I am a little like the grown-ups. I have had to grow old.

	
Chapter 5
1. As each day passed (как проходил каждый день) I would learn (изучал), in our talk (как я говорил: досл. в нашем разговоре), something (что-то) about the little prince's planet, his departure (отъезд) from it, his journey (путешествие). The information would come very slowly (поступала очень медленно), as it might chance (могло случиться) to fall from his thoughts (выпасть из его мыслей). It was in this way (это было в этом пути) that I heard (услышал: «to hear – heard» – слышать), on the third (третий) day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs (катастрофа с баобабом). 
This time, once more (ещё раз: досл. раз больше), I had the sheep to thank for it (я должен благодарить ягнёнка за это: досл. я имел ягнёнка поблагодарить за это). For the little prince asked (спросил) me abruptly (резко) - as if seized by a grave doubt (так будто выхвачено серьёзными сомнениями) – "It is true, isn't it (не правда ли: досл. не есть это), that sheep eat little bushes (ягнёнок ест маленькие кустарников)?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad (я доволен)!"
I did not understand (я не понимал) why it was so important (почему это так важно) that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added (добавил):
"Then it follows (это следует) that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out (отметил) to the little prince that baobabs were not (не есть) little bushes, but, on the contrary (напротив), trees as big as castles (деревья такие же большие, как замок); and that even if (даже если) he took a whole herd (стадо) of elephants away with him (туда с собой), the herd would not eat up one single baobab (ни одного баобаба: досл. один единственный баобаб). 
The idea of the herd of elephants (идея о стаде слонов) made the little prince laugh (заставила принца смеяться: досл. сделала маленького принца смеющимся).
"We would have to put them one on top of the other (нам придётся поставить из друг на друга: досл. одного на верхушку другого)," he said.
1. As each day passed I would learn, in our talk, something about the little prince's planet, his departure from it, his journey. The information would come very slowly, as it might chance to fall from his thoughts. It was in this way that I heard, on the third day, about the catastrophe of the baobabs. 
This time, once more, I had the sheep to thank for it. For the little prince asked me abruptly - as if seized by a grave doubt-- "It is true, isn't it, that sheep eat little bushes?"
"Yes, that is true."
"Ah! I am glad!"
I did not understand why it was so important that sheep should eat little bushes. But the little prince added:
"Then it follows that they also eat baobabs?"
I pointed out to the little prince that baobabs were not little bushes, but, on the contrary, trees as big as castles; and that even if he took a whole herd of elephants away with him, the herd would not eat up one single baobab. 
The idea of the herd of elephants made the little prince laugh.
"We would have to put them one on top of the other," he said.  
 
2. But he made a wise comment (мудрое пояснение):
"Before they grow so big (перед тем, как они выросли такими большими), the baobabs start out by being little (они были маленькими: досл. баобабы начали с быть маленькими)."
"That is strictly correct (очень правильно: досл. строго правильно)," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs (почему ты хочешь, чтобы ягнёнок ел маленькие баобабы)?"
He answered me at once (сразу же), "Oh, come, come! (ладно, ладно)", as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident (так как если бы он говорил о чём-то, что было очевидно). And I was obliged (был обязан) to make a great mental effort (сделать огромное умственное усилие) to solve (развязать) this problem, without any assistance (без какого-либо участия).
Indeed (на самом деле), as I learned (как я узнал), there were on the planet (было на планете) where the little prince lived – as on all (как и на всех) planets – good plants (растения) and bad plants. In consequence (в следствие), there were good seeds (семена) from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible (невидимые). They sleep deep (спят глубоко) in the heart of the earth's darkness (в сердце земной темноты), until some one among them (кто-то среди них) is seized with the desire to awaken (поднимается с желанием проснуться). Then this little seed will stretch itself (делают усилия) and begin (начинают) – timidly at first (робко с начала) – to push a charming little sprig (давать очаровательный маленький росток: досл. толкать росток) inoffensively upward toward the sun (безобидно вверх к солнцу). If it is only a sprout of radish (росток редиса) or the sprig of a rose-bush (побег куста роз), one would let it grow wherever it might wish (можно позволить им расти где угодно). But when it is a bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible (нужно уничтожить его настолько быстро, насколько возможно), the very first instant that one recognizes it (в первое мгновение, как узнали его). 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet (сейчас были на планете ужасные семена на планете) that was the home (была домом) of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil (почва) of that planet was infested (наводнены) with them. A baobab is something you will never (баобаб – это такое, от чего вы никогда), never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late (никогда не сможете отделаться, если заметите слишком поздно: «to get rid of» – отделаться от кого-то или чего-то). It spreads (распространяется) over the entire (всей) planet. It bores clear through it with its roots (он пронизывает её всю своими корнями). And if the planet is too small (слишком мала), and the baobabs are too many (слишком много), they split it in pieces (разделят её на части)... 
2. But he made a wise comment:
"Before they grow so big, the baobabs start out by being little."
"That is strictly correct," I said. "But why do you want the sheep to eat the little baobabs?"
He answered me at once, "Oh, come, come!", as if he were speaking of something that was self-evident. And I was obliged to make a great mental effort to solve this problem, without any assistance.
Indeed, as I learned, there were on the planet where the little prince lived-- as on all planets-- good plants and bad plants. In consequence, there were good seeds from good plants, and bad seeds from bad plants. But seeds are invisible. They sleep deep in the heart of the earth's darkness, until some one among them is seized with the desire to awaken. Then this little seed will stretch itself and begin-- timidly at first-- to push a charming little sprig inoffensively upward toward the sun. If it is only a sprout of radish or the sprig of a rose-bush, one would let it grow wherever it might wish. But when it is a bad plant, one must destroy it as soon as possible, the very first instant that one recognizes it. 
Now there were some terrible seeds on the planet that was the home of the little prince; and these were the seeds of the baobab. The soil of that planet was infested with them. A baobab is something you will never, never be able to get rid of if you attend to it too late. It spreads over the entire planet. It bores clear through it with its roots. And if the planet is too small, and the baobabs are too many, they split it in pieces...
 
3. "It is a question of discipline (это вопрос дисциплины)," the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning (когда ты закончил утренние процедуры), then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet (тогда время привести в порядок твою планету), just so (точно так же), with the greatest care (с наибольшей заботой). You must see to it (ты должен следить) that you pull up regularly (вытянуть постоянно) all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be distinguished (с первого момента, когда их можно отличить) from the rosebushes which they resemble (которые они напоминают) so closely in their earliest youth (так близко в их наиболее ранней юности). It is very tedious (скучный) work," the little prince added, "but very easy (лёгкий)." 
3. "It is a question of discipline," the little prince said to me later on. "When you've finished your own toilet in the morning, then it is time to attend to the toilet of your planet, just so, with the greatest care. You must see to it that you pull up regularly all the baobabs, at the very first moment when they can be distinguished from the rosebushes which they resemble so closely in their earliest youth. It is very tedious work," the little prince added, "but very easy."
 
4. And one day (однажды: досл. один день) he said to me: "You ought to make (должен сделать) a beautiful drawing, so that (чтобы) the children where you live (там, где ты живёшь) can see exactly how all this is (точно видели, как всё это есть). That would be very useful to them (это было бы очень полезно для них) if they were to travel some day (если им придётся путешествовать когда-то). Sometimes (иногда)," he added, "there is no harm (это не вред) in putting off a piece of work until another day (отложить часть работы на другой день). But when it is a matter of baobabs (но если дело касается баобабов), that always means a catastrophe (это всегда означает катастрофу). I knew a planet that was inhabited (была заселена) by a lazy man (ленивым человеком). He neglected (проигнорировал) three little bushes..." 
So, as the little prince described it to me (как маленький принц описал мне это), I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like (мне не очень нравится) to take the tone of a moralist (держать тон поучения). But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood (опасность баобабов так мало понимаема), and such considerable risks would be run by anyone (это угрожает любому: досл. и такой значительный риск может бежать кем угодно) who might get lost (потеряться) on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through my reserve (нарушу своё правило: досл. прорвусь сквозь). "Children (дети)," I say plainly (просто), "watch out for the baobabs (присматривайте за баобабами)!" 
My friends, like myself (мои друзья, как и я сам), have been skirting this danger for a long time (были окружены этой опасностью долгое время: «skirted» – окруженный и «skirt» – юбка), without ever knowing it (даже без знания этого); and so it is for them (это для них) that I have worked so hard over (я работал так тяжело над) this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means (урок, который был преподан мне в этом смысле: «pass» – передавать, проходить) is worth all the trouble it has cost me (стоит всех тех хлопот, которые он мне стоил: «to be worth» – стоить чего-либо). 
Perhaps (возможно) you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book (почему нет других рисунков в этой книге) as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs? (таких же чудесных и впечатляющих, как рисунок баобаба)" 
The reply is simple (ответ прост). I have tried (я пытался). But with the others I have not been successful (но с другими я не преуспел). When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity (я вдохновлялся срочной необходимостью: досл. я был несом передо мной  вдохновляющей силой срочной необходимости). 
4. And one day he said to me: "You ought to make a beautiful drawing, so that the children where you live can see exactly how all this is. That would be very useful to them if they were to travel some day. Sometimes," he added, "there is no harm in putting off a piece of work until another day. But when it is a matter of baobabs, that always means a catastrophe. I knew a planet that was inhabited by a lazy man. He neglected three little bushes..." 
So, as the little prince described it to me, I have made a drawing of that planet. I do not much like to take the tone of a moralist. But the danger of the baobabs is so little understood, and such considerable risks would be run by anyone who might get lost on an asteroid, that for once I am breaking through my reserve. "Children," I say plainly, "watch out for the baobabs!" 
My friends, like myself, have been skirting this danger for a long time, without ever knowing it; and so it is for them that I have worked so hard over this drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means is worth all the trouble it has cost me. 
Perhaps you will ask me, "Why are there no other drawing in this book as magnificent and impressive as this drawing of the baobabs?" 
The reply is simple. I have tried. But with the others I have not been successful. When I made the drawing of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the inspiring force of urgent necessity.

Chapter 6
1. Oh, little prince! Bit by bit (понемногу) I came to understand (я пришёл к пониманию) the secrets of your sad little life (секретов твоей грустной маленькой жизни)... For a long time (длительное время) you had found your only entertainment (ты находил своё единственное развлечение) in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset (в тихом удовольствии созерцания заката: «sunset» – «sun+set» – солнце + садиться). I learned that new (новую) detail on the morning of the fourth (четвёртый) day, when you said to me: "I am very fond of (люблю: «to be fond of» – любить, увлекаться чем-то) sunsets. Come, let us go look (пойдём посмотрим) at a sunset now."
1. Oh, little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the secrets of your sad little life... For a long time you had found your only entertainment in the quiet pleasure of looking at the sunset. I learned that new detail on the morning of the fourth day, w hen you said to me: "I am very fond of sunsets. Come, let us go look at a sunset now." 
 
2. "But we must wait (должны подождать)," I said.
"Wait? For what? (Ждать? Чего?)"
"For the sunset (заката). We must wait until it is time (пока не придёт время)." 
At first (поначалу) you seemed to be very much surprised (ты казался очень удивлённым). And then you laughed to yourself (рассмеялся: досл. рассмеялся к себе). You said to me (ты сказал мне):
"I am always thinking that I am at home (я постоянно думаю, что я дома)!" 
Just so (именно так). Everybody knows (каждый знает) that when it is noon (полдень) in the United States the sun is setting (садится) over France (над Францией). 
If you could fly to France in one minute (если бы ты мог долететь до Франции за 1 минуту: досл. в 1 минуту), you could go straight into the sunset (ты вошёл бы прямо в закат), right from noon (сразу же после полдня). Unfortunately (к несчастью), France is too far away for that (слишком далеко для этого). But on your tiny (крошечной) planet, my little prince (мой маленький принц), all you need do is move your chair a few steps (тебе достаточно переставить стул: досл. всё, что ты должен сделать, есть передвинуть твой стул на несколько шагов). You can see the day end (конец дня) and the twilight falling (как опускаются сумерки: досл. сумерки падают) whenever you like (когда бы ты ни захотел)... 
"One day (один день)," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times (видел закат 44 раза)!"
And a little later (чуть погодя) you added:
"You know – one loves the sunset, when one is so sad (опечаленные любят закат: досл. один любит закат, когда один печальный)..."
"Were you so sad, then (значит, тебе было грустно: досл. был ты так печален, тогда)?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets (на день 44 заката)? 
But the little prince made no reply (не ответил: досл. сделал ни одного ответа). 
2. "But we must wait," I said.
"Wait? For what?"
"For the sunset. We must wait until it is time." 
At first you seemed to be very much surprised. And then you laughed to yourself. You said to me:
"I am always thinking that I am at home!" 
Just so. Everybody knows that when it is noon in the United States the sun is setting over France. 
If you could fly to France in one minute, you could go straight into the sunset, right from noon. Unfortunately, France is too far away for that. But on your tiny planet, my little prince, all you need do is move your chair a few steps. You can see the day end and the twilight falling whenever you like... 
"One day," you said to me, "I saw the sunset forty-four times!"
And a little later you added:
"You know - one loves the sunset, when one is so sad..."
"Were you so sad, then?" I asked, "on the day of the forty-four sunsets? 
But the little prince made no reply.
	

Chapter 7
1. On the fifth (пятый) day – again (опять), as always (как всегда), it was thanks to the sheep (это было благодаря ягнёнку) – the secret of the little prince's life (секрет жизни маленького принца) was revealed (был открыт) to me. Abruptly (резко), without anything to lead up to it (совершенно внезапно: досл. без чего-то подготавливающему к этому: «to lead up to» – подготовить), and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem (как если бы вопрос родился из долгих и молчаливых раздумий (медитаций) над его проблемой), he demanded (потребовал):
"A sheep – if it eats little bushes (ест маленький кусты), does it eat flowers, too (ест он также цветы)?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach (ест всё, что находит в пределах своей досягаемости)."
"Even (даже) flowers that have thorns (шипы)?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns –  what use are they (какой в них прок: досл. какая польза есть они)?" 
I did not know (я не знал). At that moment (в тот момент) I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt (был занят, пытаясь отвинтить болт) that had got stuck in my engine (который застрял в двигателе). I was very much worried (был очень обеспокоен), for it was becoming clear to me (так как до меня доходило) that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious (поломка моего самолёта была чрезвычайно серьёзной). And I had so little drinking-water left (и у меня так мало осталось питьевой воды) that I had to fear for the worst (я начал бояться наихудшего). "The thorns – what use are they?" 
The little prince never let go of a question (всегда настаивал: досл. никогда не отпускал вопроса), once he had asked it (однажды задав его). As for me (что касается меня), I was upset over that bolt (был расстроен из-за болта). And I answered with the first thing (первая мысль) that came into my head (пришла в мою голову):
"The thorns are of no use at all (от шипов вообще никакой пользы). Flowers have thorns just for spite (у цветов шипы от злости)!"
"Oh!" 
There was a moment of complete silence (момент полнейшей тишины). Then the little prince flashed back at me (выпалил мне: «flash» – вспышка), with a kind of resentfulness (с обидой: досл. с видом обиженности): "I don't believe (верить) you! Flowers are weak creatures (слабые существа). They are naіve (наивные). They reassure themselves as best they can (успокаивают себя как только могут: досл. успокаивают себя наилучше они могут). They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons (ужасное оружие)..."
1. On the fifth day - again, as always, it was thanks to the sheep - the secret of the little prince's life was revealed to me. Abruptly, without anything to lead up to it, and as if the question had been born of long and silent meditation on his problem, he demanded:
"A sheep - if it eats little bushes, does it eat flowers, too?"
"A sheep," I answered, "eats anything it finds in its reach."
"Even flowers that have thorns?"
"Yes, even flowers that have thorns."
"Then the thorns - what use are they?" 
I did not know. At that moment I was very busy trying to unscrew a bolt that had got stuck in my engine. I was very much worried, for it was becoming clear to me that the breakdown of my plane was extremely serious. And I had so little drinking-water left that I had to fear for the worst. "The thorns-- what use are they?" 
The little prince never let go of a question, once he had asked it. As for me, I was upset over that bolt. And I answered with the first thing that came into my head:
"The thorns are of no use at all. Flowers have thorns just for spite!"
"Oh!" 
There was a moment of complete silence. Then the little prince flashed back at me, with a kind of resentfulness: "I don't believe you! Flowers are weak creatures. They are naive. They reassure themselves as best they can. They believe that their thorns are terrible weapons..." 
 
2. I did not answer (я не ответил). At that instant (в то мгновение) I was saying to myself (я сказал себе): "If this bolt still won't turn (если этот болт не провернётся), I am going to knock it out with the hammer (я выбью его молотом)." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts (побеспокоил мои мысли). "And you actually (действительно) believe that the flowers – "
"Oh, no!" I cried (закричал). "No, no no! I don't believe anything (я ни во что не верю). I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see (неужели ты не видишь) – I am very busy with matters of consequence (досл. делом особой важности)!" 
He stared at me, thunderstruck (уставился на меня, словно поражённый громом).
"Matters of consequence!" 
He looked at me there (он смотрел на меня), with my hammer in my hand (с молотом в руке), my fingers black with engine-grease (пальцы чёрные от моторного масла), bending down over an object (согнувшегося на штуковиной) which seemed to him extremely ugly (которая казалась ему невероятно уродливой)...
"You talk just like the grown-ups (ты говоришь, как взрослый)!"
That made me a little ashamed (мне стало немного стыдно: досл. это сделало меня немного застыдившимся). But he went on (продолжал), relentlessly (неумолимо):
"You mix everything up together (ты всё смешал вместе)... You confuse everything (спутал всё)..." 
He was really very angry (злой). He tossed his golden curls in the breeze (он встряхнул своими золотыми кудрями на ветру).
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced (некоторый краснолицый) gentleman. He has never smelled a flower (не знает запаха цветов: никогда не нюхал: «to smell – smelled» –  пахнуть, чувствовать запах). He has never looked at a star (не глядел на звёзды). He has never loved any one (никогда никого не любил). He has never done anything in his life (он ничего не делал в своей жизни) but add up figures (только складывал цифры). And all day he says over and over, just like you (и весь день он повторял снова и снова, точно как ты): 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride (это заставляло его раздуваться о гордости: «swell up» – распухать). But he is not a man (он не человек) – he is a mushroom (гриб)!"
"A what (Что)?"
"A mushroom!" 
The little prince was now white with rage (побелел от ярости: досл. был сейчас белый с яростью).
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years (растили шипы миллионы лет). For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same (миллионы лет овцы если их, точно также). And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them (почему цветы утруждают себя, взращивая шипы, от которых нет пользы: досл. почему цветы идут в так много забот)? Is the warfare (война) between (между) the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence (не более ли это важно) than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums (чем суммы краснолицего джентельмена)? And if I know – I, myself (я, лично) – one flower which is unique in the world (единственный в мире), which grows nowhere but on my planet (нигде не растет, кроме моей планеты: досл. растет нигде, только на моей планете), but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning (но которое один ягнёнок может уничтожить в одно мгновение какого-то утра), without even noticing what he is doing (даже не замечая, что делает) – Oh! You think that is not important!" 
His face turned from white to red (превратилось с белого в красное) as he continued (по мере того, как он продолжал: «to continue – continued» – продолжать):
"If some one loves a flower (если кто-то любит цветок), of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars (цветение которого одно на миллионы звезд: досл. которого только одно цветение растёт во всех миллионах и миллионах звезд), it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars (этого достаточно, чтобы сделать его счастливым, когда он смотрит на звезды). He can say to himself (он может сказать себе), 'Somewhere, my flower is there... (где-то там мой цветок…)' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened (все его звёзды померкнут)... And you think that is not important!" 
He could not say anything more (ему нечего было добавить). His words were choked (были задушены) by sobbing (рыданием). 
The night had fallen (наступила ночь: досл. ночь упала). I had let my tools drop from my hands (я оставил инструменты: досл. дал инструментам выпасть из моих рук). Of what moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death (и какое значение имели мой молот, болт, жажда или смерть: «moment» в устойчивых выражениях может означать «важность»)? On one star, one planet, my planet (моей планете), the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted (был маленький принц, который нуждался в утешении). I took him in my arms (взял на руки), and rocked (качать) him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger (цветок, который ты любишь, в безопасности: досл. не есть в опасности). I will draw you a muzzle (намордник) for your sheep. I will draw you a railing (ограду) to put around your flower (поставить вокруг цветка). I will – " 
I did not know what to say to him (я не знал, что ему сказать). I felt awkward and blundering (я чувствовал себя неудобно и глупо: досл. ошибочно). I did not know how I could reach him (я не знал, как его достичь), where (где) I could overtake (обогнать) him and go on hand in hand with him once more (идти рука об руку с ним ещё раз). 
It is such a secret place, the land of tears (это такое тайное место, земля слёз). 
2. I did not answer. At that instant I was saying to myself: "If this bolt still won't turn, I am going to knock it out with the hammer." Again the little prince disturbed my thoughts. "And you actually believe that the flowers - "
"Oh, no!" I cried. "No, no no! I don't believe anything. I answered you with the first thing that came into my head. Don't you see - I am very busy with matters of consequence!" 
He stared at me, thunderstruck.
"Matters of consequence!" 
He looked at me there, with my hammer in my hand, my fingers black with engine-grease, bending down over an object which seemed to him extremely ugly...
"You talk just like the grown-ups!"
That made me a little ashamed. But he went on, relentlessly:
"You mix everything up together... You confuse everything..." 
He was really very angry. He tossed his golden curls in the breeze.
"I know a planet where there is a certain red-faced gentleman. He has never smelled a flower. He has never looked at a star. He has never loved any one. He has never done anything in his life but add up figures. And all day he says over and over, just like you: 'I am busy with matters of consequence!' And that makes him swell up with pride. But he is not a man-- he is a mushroom!"
"A what?"
"A mushroom!" 
The little prince was now white with rage.
"The flowers have been growing thorns for millions of years. For millions of years the sheep have been eating them just the same. And is it not a matter of consequence to try to understand why the flowers go to so much trouble to grow thorns which are never of any use to them? Is the warfare between the sheep and the flowers not important? Is this not of more consequence than a fat red-faced gentleman's sums? And if I know - I, myself - one flower which is unique in the world, which grows nowhere but on my planet, but which one little sheep can destroy in a single bite some morning, without even noticing what he is doing-- Oh! You think that is not important!" 
His face turned from white to red as he continued:
"If some one loves a flower, of which just one single blossom grows in all the millions and millions of stars, it is enough to make him happy just to look at the stars. He can say to himself, 'Somewhere, my flower is there...' But if the sheep eats the flower, in one moment all his stars will be darkened... And you think that is not important!" 
He could not say anything more. His words were choked by sobbing. 
The night had fallen. I had let my tools drop from my hands. Of what moment now was my hammer, my bolt, or thirst, or death? On one star, one planet, my planet, the Earth, there was a little prince to be comforted. I took him in my arms, and rocked him. I said to him:
"The flower that you love is not in danger. I will draw you a muzzle for your sheep. I will draw you a railing to put around your flower. I will - " 
I did not know what to say to him. I felt awkward and blundering. I did not know how I could reach him, where I could overtake him and go on hand in hand with him once more. 
It is such a secret place, the land of tears. 

Chapter 8
1. I soon learned to know this flower better (вскоре я узнал этот цветок лучше: досл. я научился знать). On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple (всегда были очень просты). They had only one ring of petals (кольцо лепестков); they took up no room at all (не занимали места: «room» не только «комната», но и «место»); they were a trouble to nobody (никому не создавали проблем: досл. были проблемой для никого). One morning they would appear in the grass (утром они появлялись в траве), and by night they would have faded peacefully away (к ночи мирно исчезали: досл. ночью увядали мирно прочь: «to fade – faded» – увядать, линять). But one day, from a seed (семена) blown from no one knew where (принесённому ветром неизвестно откуда: «to blow – blown» – дуть), a new flower had come up (появился); and the little prince had watched very closely (наблюдал очень внимательно: досл. очень близко) over this small sprout (росток) which was not like any other small sprouts (который не походил на другие маленькие ростки) on his planet. It might (это мог), you see (понимаете), have been a new kind (новый вид) of baobab. 
The shrub (куст) soon stopped growing (перестал расти вскоре: досл. вскоре остановил рост), and began to get ready to produce a flower (и собрался цвести: досл. начал ставать готов производить цветок). The little prince, who was present (присутствовал) at the first appearance (появление) of a huge bud (огромного бутона), felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition (предчувствовал сразу же чудесное видение) must emerge from it (которое должно было появиться с этого). But the flower was not satisfied (но цветку было мало: досл. цветок не был удовлетворен) to complete the preparations for her beauty (завершить приготовления к своей красоте: «to prepare» – приготовить, «preparation» – приготовления) in the shelter of her green chamber (в укрытии его зелёных покоев: в англ. «flower» – she (она), поэтому «her», а рус. цветок – муж. рода). She chose her colors with the greatest care (он (она) подбирал цвета особо тщательно: досл. с величайшей заботой). She adjusted (приводил(а) в порядок) her petals (лепестки) one by one (один за другим). She did not wish to go out into the world (он(а) не хотел(а) появляться в этот мир) all rumpled (мятый), like the field poppies (полевые маки). It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear (он(а) хотел(а) появиться в полном сиянии своей красоты: досл. это было только полное сияние ее красоты, что она хотела появиться). Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature (кокетливое создание)! And her mysterious adornment (её таинственное украшение) lasted for days and days (длилось многие дни). 
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise (точно на рассвете), she suddenly showed herself (она внезапно показала себя). And, after working with all this painstaking precision (после такой старательной, четкой работы: досл. после работы со всей этой старательной четкостью), she yawned (зевнула) and said:
"Ah! I am scarcely awake (я не вполне проснулась). I beg that you will excuse me (прошу прощения: досл. я прошу, чтобы вы извинили меня). My petals are still all disarranged (мои лепестки в таком беспорядке)..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration (не смог удержать свой восторг):
"Oh! How beautiful you are (какая ты красивая)!"
"Am I not (не правда ли: досл. не есть я)?" the flower responded, sweetly (ответила сладко). "And I was born at the same moment as the sun... (я родилась одновременно с солнцем)"
The little prince could guess easily enough (мог сразу догадаться: «to guess – guessed» – догадываться) that she was not any too modest (она была не слишком скромна) – but how moving (трогательной) – and exciting (волнующей) – she was! "I think it is time for breakfast (думаю, пора завтракать: досл. это есть время для завтрака)," she added an instant later (мгновение спустя). "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs (если вы будете так добры и позаботитесь о мне: досл. если вы имели бы доброту подумать о моих потребностях) – " 
And the little prince, completely abashed (совсем смущённый), went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water (пошёл искать лейку со свежей водой: «sprinkling» – брызгающий, «can» – бидон). 
1. I soon learned to know this flower better. On the little prince's planet the flowers had always been very simple. They had only one ring of petals; they took up no room at all; they were a trouble to nobody. One morning they would appear in the grass, and by night they would have faded peacefully away. But one day, from a seed blown from no one knew where, a new flower had come up; and the little prince had watched very closely over this small sprout which was not like any other small sprouts on his planet. It might, you see, have been a new kind of baobab. 
The shrub soon stopped growing, and began to get ready to produce a flower. The little prince, who was present at the first appearance of a huge bud, felt at once that some sort of miraculous apparition must emerge from it. But the flower was not satisfied to complete the preparations for her beauty in the shelter of her green chamber. She chose her colors with the greatest care. She adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to go out into the world all rumpled, like the field poppies. It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she wished to appear. Oh, yes! She was a coquettish creature! And her mysterious adornment lasted for days and days. 
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise, she suddenly showed herself. And, after working with all this painstaking precision, she yawned and said:
"Ah! I am scarcely awake. I beg that you will excuse me. My petals are still all disarranged..."
But the little prince could not restrain his admiration:
"Oh! How beautiful you are!"
"Am I not?" the flower responded, sweetly. "And I was born at the same moment as the sun..."
The little prince could guess easily enough that she was not any too modest – but how moving – and exciting – she was! "I think it is time for breakfast," she added an instant later. "If you would have the kindness to think of my needs – " 
And the little prince, completely abashed, went to look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water. 



2. So, he tended (заботился: «to tend – tended» – заботиться) the flower. 
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity (так же и она начала очень скоро мучить его своим тщеславием) – which was (которое было), if the truth be known (если говорить по правде: досл. если правда известна), a little difficult to deal with (немного трудно было иметь дело: «to deal with» – иметь дело). One day, for instance (например), when she was speaking of her four thorns (четыре шипа), she said to the little prince: "Let the tigers come with their claws (пусть только появятся тигры с их когтями)!" 
2. So, he tended the flower. 
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him with her vanity - which was, if the truth be known, a little difficult to deal with. One day, for instance, when she was speaking of her four thorns, she said to the little prince: "Let the tigers come with their claws!"
 
3. "There are no tigers on my planet (на моей планете нет тигров)," the little prince objected (возразил). "And, anyway (в любом случае), tigers do not eat weeds (бурьян)." "I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly. "Please excuse me... (извини меня)". "I am not at all afraid of tigers (я вообще не боюсь тигров)," she went on (продолжала), "but I have a horror of drafts (сквозняки). I suppose (предполагаю) you wouldn't have a screen (у тебя не найдётся ширмы) for me?" "A horror of drafts (боязнь сквозняков) – that is bad luck (несчастье), for a plant (растение)," remarked (заметил) the little prince, and added to himself (и про себя добавил), "This flower is a very complex (запутанный, составной, сложный) creature..." "At night I want you to put me under a glass globe (накрыл меня стеклянным шаром: досл. я хочу, чтобы ты поставил меня под…). It is very cold (очень холодно) where you live. In the place I came from (там, откуда я пришла) – "
3. "There are no tigers on my planet," the little prince objected. "And, anyway, tigers do not eat weeds." "I am not a weed," the flower replied, sweetly. "Please excuse me..." "I am not at all afraid of tigers," she went on, "but I have a horror of drafts. I suppose you wouldn't have a screen for me?" "A horror of drafts - that is bad luck, for a plant," remarked the little prince, and added to himself, "This flower is a very complex creature..." "At night I want you to put me under a glass globe. It is very cold where you live. In the place I came from - " 
 
4. But she interrupted herself at that point (замолчала: досл. прервала себя по этому поводу). She had come in the form of a seed (пришла в форме семена). She could not have known anything of any other worlds (не могла что-либо знать о других мирах). Embarrassed  over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a naive untruth (смущенная, что попалась на такой простой неправде: досл. дала себе быть пойманной на краю…), she coughed (кашлянула) two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong (чтобы маленький принц почувствовал себя виноватым: досл. в порядке чтобы поставить маленького принца в «неправильность»). "The screen?" "I was just going to look for it (я как раз собирался идти искать её) when you spoke to me..."
4. But she interrupted herself at that point. She had come in the form of a seed. She could not have known anything of any other worlds. Embarrassed over having let herself be caught on the verge of such a naive untruth, she coughed two or three times, in order to put the little prince in the wrong. "The screen?" "I was just going to look for it when you spoke to me..."
 
5. Then she forced her cough a little more (немного усилила кашель) so that he should suffer from remorse just the same (чтобы и он страдал от угрызений совести точно так же). 
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love (несмотря на все добрые намерения, которые были неотделимы от его любви), had soon come to doubt her (вскоре начал в ней сомневаться: досл. пришёл к сомнению). He had taken seriously words which were without importance (воспринимал всерьез несерьезные слова: досл. брал серьезно слова, которые были без важности), and it made him very unhappy (от этого был несчастлив: досл. это делало его несчастливым). "I ought not to have listened to her (я не должен был ее слушать)," he confided (доверился) to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers (не надо слушать цветы). One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance (нужно просто смотреть на них и вдыхать их аромат). Mine perfumed all my planet (мой цветок сделал всю планету благоухающей). But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace (не знал, как найти удовольствие в ее изяществе). This tale of claws (басни о коготках), which disturbed me so much (которые меня так беспокоили), should only have filled my heart (наполняли моё сердце) with tenderness and pity (нежностью и состраданием)." 
And he continued his confidences (продолжал свое признание):
"The fact is (дело в том) that I did not know how to understand anything (не знал, как понять)! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words (я должен был судить по делам, а не по словам). She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me (окутывала меня своим ароматом и сиянием). I ought never to have run away (не должен был убегать) from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection (привязанность) that lay behind her poor little stratagems (которая скрывалась за ее маленькими бедными уловками: досл. лежало за…).
Flowers are so inconsistent (непоследовательны)! But I was too young to know how to love her... (но я был слишком юн, чтобы знать, как её любить)" 
5. Then she forced her cough a little more so that he should suffer from remorse just the same. 
So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that was inseparable from his love, had soon come to doubt her. He had taken seriously words which were without importance, and it made him very unhappy. "I ought not to have listened to her," he confided to me one day. "One never ought to listen to the flowers. One should simply look at them and breathe their fragrance. Mine perfumed all my planet. But I did not know how to take pleasure in all her grace. This tale of claws, which disturbed me so much, should only have filled my heart with tenderness and pity." 
And he continued his confidences:
"The fact is that I did not know how to understand anything! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by words. She cast her fragrance and her radiance over me. I ought never to have run away from her... I ought to have guessed all the affection that lay behind her poor little stratagems.
Flowers are so inconsistent! But I was too young to know how to love her..."

Chapter 9
1. I believe (верю) that for his escape (для его побега) he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds (он предпочел улететь со стаей диких птиц: досл. он взял преимущество миграции стаи диких птиц). On the morning of his departure (в утро его отбытия) he put his planet in perfect order (он привел планету в идеальный порядок). He carefully cleaned out (тщательно почистил) his active volcanoes. He possessed (владел) two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning (на них удобно было готовить завтрак по утрам: досл. они были удобны для того, чтобы жарить). He also had one volcano that was extinct (потухший). But, as he said (как он говорил), "One never knows! (кто его знает: досл. один никогда знает)" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out (хорошо почищены), volcanoes burn slowly and steadily (горят медленно и спокойно (монотонно)), without any eruptions (без каких-либо извержений). Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney (как огонь в дымоходе). 
On our earth (у нас: досл. на нашей земле) we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes (мы ещё не доросли до того, чтобы чистить наши вулканы). That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us (вот почему они нас постоянно беспокоят: досл. вот почему они не приносят конца проблем для нас). 
The little prince also pulled up (выполол), with a certain sense of dejection (с каким-то унынием: досл. с некоторым чувством уныния), the last little shoots of the baobabs (последние маленькие ростки баобабов). He believed that he would never want to return (он верил, что не захочет вернуться). But on this last morning (в то последнее утро) all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him (все эти обычные заботы (задания) были ему очень дороги). And when he watered the flower (полили цветок) for the last time, and prepared to place (приготовился поместить) her under the shelter of her glass globe (под стеклянный колпак), he realized (осознал) that he was very close to tears (что готов расплакаться: досл. был близок к слезам). "Goodbye," he said to the flower. 
But she made no answer (не ответила).
"Goodbye," he said again (опять).
The flower coughed (кашлянула). But it was not because she had a cold (но не потому, что ей было холодно).
"I have been silly (я была глупа)," she said to him, at last (наконец). "I ask your forgiveness (я прошу твоего прощения). Try to be happy (постарайся быть счастливым)..." 
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches (он был удивлён этим отсутствием упреков). He stood there all bewildered (он стоял там весь смущенный), the glass globe held arrested in mid-air (стеклянный колпак повис на полпути: досл. держался остановленным в «среднем воздухе»). He did not understand this quiet sweetness (этой тихой нежности).
"Of course I love you (конечно же я тебя люблю)," the flower said to him. "It is my fault (это моя вина) that you have not known it all the while (что ты не знал это все это время). That is of no importance (это неважно). But you (но ты) — you have been just as foolish as I (ты был таким же дураком, как и я). Try to be happy... let the glass globe be (оставь колпак). I don't want it any more (мне он больше не нужен: досл. я не хочу его больше)."
"But the wind (но ветер) — "
"My cold is not so bad as all that (моя простуда не так плоха как все это)... the cool night air will do me good (холодный ночной воздух мне полезен: досл. делает мне хорошо). I am a flower."
"But the animals (животные) —"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars (я должна вытерпеть присутствие двух или трех гусениц) if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies (если хочу познакомиться с бабочками). It seems that they are very beautiful (кажется, они очень красивые). And if not the butterflies – and the caterpillars — who will call upon me (кто будет со мной говорить)? You will be far away (ты будешь далеко)... as for the large animals (что касается больших животных) — I am not at all afraid of any of them (я вообще их не боюсь). I have my claws (когти)." 
And, naively (наивно), she showed her four thorns (шипы). Then she added: "Don't linger like this (не задерживайся здесь (сейчас)). You have decided to go away (ты решил уйти). Now go (так иди: досл. теперь иди)!" For she did not want him to see her crying (она не хотела, чтобы он видел ее плачущей). She was such a proud flower (она была таким гордым цветком)... 
1. I believe that for his escape he took advantage of the migration of a flock of wild birds. On the morning of his departure he put his planet in perfect order. He carefully cleaned out his active volcanoes. He possessed two active volcanoes; and they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in the morning. He also had one volcano that was extinct. But, as he said, "One never knows!" So he cleaned out the extinct volcano, too. If they are well cleaned out, volcanoes burn slowly and steadily, without any eruptions. Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney. 
On our earth we are obviously much too small to clean out our volcanoes. That is why they bring no end of trouble upon us. 
The little prince also pulled up, with a certain sense of dejection, the last little shoots of the baobabs. He believed that he would never want to return. But on this last morning all these familiar tasks seemed very precious to him. And when he watered the flower for the last time, and prepared to place her under the shelter of her glass globe, he realized that he was very close to tears. "Goodbye," he said to the flower. 
But she made no answer.
"Goodbye," he said again.
The flower coughed. But it was not because she had a cold.
"I have been silly," she said to him, at last. "I ask your forgiveness. Try to be happy..." 
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches. He stood there all bewildered, the glass globe held arrested in mid-air. He did not understand this quiet sweetness.
"Of course I love you," the flower said to him. "It is my fault that you have not known it all the while. That is of no importance. But you - you have been just as foolish as I. Try to be happy... let the glass globe be. I don't want it any more."
"But the wind - "
"My cold is not so bad as all that... the cool night air will do me good. I am a flower."
"But the animals -"
"Well, I must endure the presence of two or three caterpillars if I wish to become acquainted with the butterflies. It seems that they are very beautiful. And if not the butterflies - and the caterpillars - who will call upon me? You will be far away... as for the large animals - I am not at all afraid of any of them. I have my claws." 
And, naively, she showed her four thorns. Then she added: "Don't linger like this. You have decided to go away. Now go!" For she did not want him to see her crying. She was such a proud flower...
 

Chapter 10
1. He found himself in the neighborhood  (оказался по соседству: досл. нашел себя в соседстве) of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them (поэтому он начал с визита на них: «to begіn — began» — начать), in order to add to his knowledge (чтобы пополнить знания: «in order to» — для того, чтобы). 
The first of them was inhabited by a king (на первом жил король: досл. был населен королем). Clad in royal purple and ermine (одетый в королевское одеяние с горностаем ), he was seated upon a throne (он сидел на троне) which was at the same time both simple and majestic (который был прост и прекрасен: досл. который в одно и то же время был оба прост и прекрасен).
"Ah! Here is a subject (а вот и подчиненный)," exclaimed (воскликнул) the king, when he saw the little prince coming (когда увидел, как появился маленький принц: досл. увидел приходящего).
And the little prince asked himself (сам себя):
"How could he recognize (узнать) me when he had never seen me before (никогда не видел до того)?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings (что короли воспринимают мир упрощенно: досл. как мир упрощен для королей). To them, all men are subjects (для них все люди подданные).
"Approach, so that I may see you better, (подойди, дабы я мог видеть тебя лучше)" said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody (был невероятно горд быть королем хоть для кого-то). 
1. He found himself in the neighborhood of the asteroids 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, and 330. He began, therefore, by visiting them, in order to add to his knowledge 
The first of them was inhabited by a king. Clad in royal purple and ermine, he was seated upon a throne which was at the same time both simple and majestic.
"Ah! Here is a subject," exclaimed the king, when he saw the little prince coming.
And the little prince asked himself:
"How could he recognize me when he had never seen me before?"
He did not know how the world is simplified for kings. To them, all men are subjects.
"Approach, so that I may see you better," said the king, who felt consumingly proud of being at last a king over somebody.  
2. The little prince looked everywhere (огляделся: досл. смотрел везде) to find a place to sit down (присесть); but the entire (вся) planet was crammed (переполнен) and obstructed (загроможден) by the king's magnificent ermine robe (прекрасной королевской горностаевой мантией). So he remained standing upright (поэтому он стоял: досл. оставался стоять прямо), and, since he was tired (так как он устал), he yawned (зевнул: «to yawn — yawned» — зевать).
"It is contrary to etiquette (это перечит правилам этикета) to yawn in the presence of a king, (в присутствии короля)" the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so (я запрещаю тебе делать так)."
"I can't help it (ничего не поделаешь: досл. я не могу помочь этому). I can't stop myself (не могу остановиться)," replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed (совершенно сбитый с толку). "I have come on a long journey (я долго был в пути), and I have had no sleep (не спал: досл. не имел сна)…"
"Ah, then (ну тогда)," the king said. "I order you to yawn (приказываю тебе зевать). It is years since I have seen anyone yawning (я много лет уже не видел, как зевают). Yawns, to me (для меня), are objects of curiosity (интересны: досл. предмет любопытства). Come, now (Ну, давай)! Yawn again (зевни опять)! It is an order (это приказ)."
"That frightens (пугает) me... I cannot, any more..." murmured (пробормотал) the little prince, now completely abashed (совершенно сконфуженный).
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I - I order you sometimes to yawn (иногда зевать) and sometimes to - "
He sputtered (засуетился) a little, and seemed vexed (казалось огорчился).
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon (на чем король обстоятельно настаивал) was that his authority should be respected (чтобы его власть уважалась). He tolerated no disobedience (он не терпел непослушания). He was an absolute monarch (абсолютный монарх). But, because he was a very good man (но поскольку он был очень хорошим человеком), he made his orders reasonable (он делал свои приказы разумными).
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example (для примера: досл. дорогой примера), "if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird (превратиться на морскую птицу), and if the general did not obey me (не послушает), that would not be the fault of the general (это не была бы вина генерала). It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince (поступила застенчивая просьба от маленького принца).
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle (и величественно собрал складки своей мантии).
But the little prince was wondering (удивлен)... The planet was tiny (крошечная). Over what could this king really rule (чем мог король тут править)?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg (прошу) that you will excuse my asking you a question – (извинить меня за вопрос: досл. извинить мое задавание вопроса)"
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him (поспешил заверить его).
"Sire - over what do you rule (Сир — чем Вы правите)?"
"Over everything (всем)," said the king, with magnificent simplicity (с величественной простотой).
"Over everything?" 
The king made a gesture (жест), which took in his planet, the other planets, and all the stars (который захватил его планету, другие планеты и все звезды).
"Over all that (всем этим)?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered. 
For his rule was not only absolute (власть была не только абсолютной): it was also universal (также вселенской).
"And the stars obey you (звезды подчиняются Вам)?"
"Certainly they do (естественно: досл. конечно они так делают)," the king said. "They obey instantly (подчиняются немедля). I do not permit insubordination (не позволяю непослушания)." 
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at (такая власть удивляла маленького принца: досл. была предметом для маленького принца удивляться). If he had been master of such complete authority (если бы он располагал такой безграничной властью: досл. был хозяином такой полной власти), he would have been able to watch the sunset (он смог бы видеть закат), not forty-four times in one day (не 44 раза на день), but seventy-two (72), or even a hundred (даже 100), or even two hundred times (или даже 200), without ever having to move his chair (даже не передвигая стул). And because (потому) he felt a bit sad (он немного взгрустнул: досл. почувствовал немного грусти) as he remembered (вспомнил) his little planet which he had forsaken (которую он покинул: «to forsake — forsook — forsaken» — покидать, бросать), he plucked up his courage (фразеологизм: набрался храбрости) to ask the king a favor (попросить об услуге (милости):
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness (будьте так добры: досл. сделайте мне такое добро)... Order the sun to set (прикажите солнцу сесть)... "
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly (порхать с цветка на цветок, как бабочка), or to write a tragic drama (написать трагедию), or to change himself into a sea bird (превратиться в морскую птицу), and if the general did not carry out (выполнит) the order that he had received (приказ, который получил), which one of us would be in the wrong? (который из нас был бы неправ)" the king demanded (настаивал). "The general, or myself? (генерал или я)"
"You," said the little prince firmly (непоколебимо).
"Exactly (точно). One must require from each one (можно требовать от человека) the duty which each one can perform (обязанности, которые он может выполнить)," the king went on (продолжал). "Accepted authority (общепризнанная власть) rests first of all on reason (покоится прежде всего на разуме). If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea (броситься в море), they would rise up in revolution (они восстанут: досл. поднимутся в революции). I have the right to require obedience (у меня есть право требовать послушания) because my orders are reasonable (потому что мои приказы разумны)."
"Then my sunset (тогда как мой закат)?" the little prince reminded (напомнил) him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it (он никогда не забыл однажды заданных вопросов).
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it (я прикажу это). But, according to my science of government (согласно моей науке управления), I shall wait until conditions are favorable (я должен подождать благоприятных условий)."
"When will that be (когда это будет)?" inquired (осведомился) the little prince.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else (прежде, чем что-либо сказать) he consulted a bulky almanac (заглянул в большой календарь: досл. проконсультировался). "Hum! Hum! That will be about (это будет около) - about - that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight (сегодня вечером около 20 минут восьмого). And you will see how well I am obeyed (как меня почитают: досл. как меня слушают)."

2. The little prince looked everywhere to find a place to sit down; but the entire planet was crammed and obstructed by the king's magnificent ermine robe. So he remained standing upright, and, since he was tired, he yawned.
"It is contrary to etiquette to yawn in the presence of a king," the monarch said to him. "I forbid you to do so."
"I can't help it. I can't stop myself," replied the little prince, thoroughly embarrassed. "I have come on a long journey, and I have had no sleep..."
"Ah, then," the king said. "I order you to yawn. It is years since I have seen anyone yawning. Yawns, to me, are objects of curiosity. Come, now! Yawn again! It is an order."
"That frightens me... I cannot, any more..." murmured the little prince, now completely abashed.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king. "Then I - I order you sometimes to yawn and sometimes to - "
He sputtered a little, and seemed vexed.
For what the king fundamentally insisted upon was that his authority should be respected. He tolerated no disobedience. He was an absolute monarch. But, because he was a very good man, he made his orders reasonable.
"If I ordered a general," he would say, by way of example, "if I ordered a general to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not obey me, that would not be the fault of the general. It would be my fault."
"May I sit down?" came now a timid inquiry from the little prince.
"I order you to do so," the king answered him, and majestically gathered in a fold of his ermine mantle.
But the little prince was wondering... The planet was tiny. Over what could this king really rule?
"Sire," he said to him, "I beg that you will excuse my asking you a question - "
"I order you to ask me a question," the king hastened to assure him.
"Sire - over what do you rule?"
"Over everything," said the king, with magnificent simplicity.
"Over everything?" 
The king made a gesture, which took in his planet, the other planets, and all the stars.
"Over all that?" asked the little prince.
"Over all that," the king answered. 
For his rule was not only absolute: it was also universal.
"And the stars obey you?"
"Certainly they do," the king said. "They obey instantly. I do not permit insubordination." 
Such power was a thing for the little prince to marvel at. If he had been master of such complete authority, he would have been able to watch the sunset, not forty-four times in one day, but seventy-two, or even a hundred, or even two hundred times, with out ever having to move his chair. And because he felt a bit sad as he remembered his little planet which he had forsaken, he plucked up his courage to ask the king a favor:
"I should like to see a sunset... do me that kindness... Order the sun to set..."
"If I ordered a general to fly from one flower to another like a butterfly, or to write a tragic drama, or to change himself into a sea bird, and if the general did not carry out the order that he had received, which one of us would be in the wrong?" the king demanded. "The general, or myself?"
"You," said the little prince firmly.
"Exactly. One much require from each one the duty which each one can perform," the king went on. "Accepted authority rests first of all on reason. If you ordered your people to go and throw themselves into the sea, they would rise up in revolution. I have the right to require obedience because my orders are reasonable."
"Then my sunset?" the little prince reminded him: for he never forgot a question once he had asked it.
"You shall have your sunset. I shall command it. But, according to my science of government, I shall wait until conditions are favorable."
"When will that be?" inquired the little prince.
"Hum! Hum!" replied the king; and before saying anything else he consulted a bulky almanac. "Hum! Hum! That will be about - about - that will be this evening about twenty minutes to eight. And you will see how well I am obeyed."
3. The little prince yawned. He was regretting (сожалел) his lost (потерянный) sunset. And then, too, he was already beginning to be a little bored (ему уже стало скучно: досл. ему начинало становиться скучно).
"I have nothing more to do here (мне нечего больше здесь)," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again (поэтому я отправляюсь снова в путь)." "Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister (сделаю тебя министром)!"
"Minister of what (министром чего)?"
"Minster of - of Justice! (правосудия)"
"But there is nobody here to judge (но здесь некого судить)!"
"We do not know that (мы этого не знаем)," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom (я еще не осмотрел свои владения: досл. я еще не сделал полный обход). I am very old (я очень стар). There is no room (места) here for a carriage (повозка, карета). And it tires me to walk (ходьба меня утомляет)." 
"Oh, but I have looked already (я уже посмотрел)!" said the little prince, turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet (повернулся, чтобы еще раз взглянуть на другую сторону планеты). On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all (там, как и здесь, никого нет)...
"Then you shall judge yourself (будешь судить себя)," the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all (это тяжелее всего). It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others (значительно тяжелее судить себя самого, чем судить других). If you succeed in (если ты преуспеешь) judging yourself rightly (объективно), then you are indeed a man of true wisdom (ты станешь человеком истинной мудрости)."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere (судить себя можно везде). I do not need to live (мне не нужно жить) on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe (у меня есть причины полагать) that somewhere (где-то) on my planet there is an old rat (крыса). I hear him at night (слышу ее ночью). You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death (приговорить к смерти). Thus his life will depend on your justice (но ее жизнь будет зависеть от твоего правосудия). But you will pardon him on each occasion (будешь миловать каждый раз); for he must be treated thriftily (к ней надо относиться бережно). He is the only one we have (она у нас одна-единственная)."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death (мне не нравится приговаривать к смерти). And now I think I will go on my way (я, пожалуй, пойду)."
"No," said the king. 
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure (закончив приготовления к отбытию), had no wish to grieve the old monarch (не хотел печалить старого монарха).
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed (полного подчинения)," he said, "he should be able to give me a reasonable order (сможет дать мне разумный приказ). He should be able, for example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute (приказать мне уйти по истечению этой минуты). It seems to me that conditions are favorable (мне кажется, что условия подходящие)..."
As the king made no answer (не ответил: досл. не сделал ответа), the little prince hesitated (колебался) a moment. Then, with a sigh (вздох), he took his leave (отбыл: досл. взял свой уход).
"I made you my Ambassador (посол)," the king called out (выкрикнул), hastily (поспешно).
He had a magnificent air of authority (его власть была удивительна (прекрасна)).
"The grown-ups are very strange (странные)," the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey (продолжал свой путь).
3. The little prince yawned. He was regretting his lost sunset. And then, too, he was already beginning to be a little bored.
"I have nothing more to do here," he said to the king. "So I shall set out on my way again." "Do not go," said the king, who was very proud of having a subject. "Do not go. I will make you a Minister!"
"Minister of what?"
"Minster of - of Justice!"
"But there is nobody here to judge!"
"We do not know that," the king said to him. "I have not yet made a complete tour of my kingdom. I am very old. There is no room here for a carriage. And it tires me to walk." 
"Oh, but I have looked already!" said the little prince, turning around to give one more glance to the other side of the planet. On that side, as on this, there was nobody at all...
"Then you shall judge yourself," the king answered. "that is the most difficult thing of all. It is much more difficult to judge oneself than to judge others. If you succeed in judging yourself rightly, then you are indeed a man of true wisdom."
"Yes," said the little prince, "but I can judge myself anywhere. I do not need to live on this planet.
"Hum! Hum!" said the king. "I have good reason to believe that somewhere on my planet there is an old rat. I hear him at night. You can judge this old rat. From time to time you will condemn him to death. Thus his life will depend on your justice. But you will pardon him on each occasion; for he must be treated thriftily. He is the only one we have."
"I," replied the little prince, "do not like to condemn anyone to death. And now I think I will go on my way."
"No," said the king. 
But the little prince, having now completed his preparations for departure, had no wish to grieve the old monarch.
"If Your Majesty wishes to be promptly obeyed," he said, "he should be able to give me a reasonable order. He should be able, for example, to order me to be gone by the end of one minute. It seems to me that conditions are favorable..."
As the king made no answer, the little prince hesitated a moment. Then, with a sigh, he took his leave.
"I made you my Ambassador," the king called out, hastily.
He had a magnificent air of authority.
"The grown-ups are very strange," the little prince said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 11
1. The second planet was inhabited (вторая планета была населена) by a conceited man (себялюбцем: досл. тщеславным, самоуверенным человеком). "Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer (кажется, у меня поклонник: досл. я есть около получения визита почитателем)!" he exclaimed from afar (издали), when he first (впервые) saw the little prince coming (пришел).
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers (для тщеславного все другие — поклонники). 
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing (какая у Вас чудная шляпа: досл. это чудная шляпа Вы носите)."
"It is a hat for salutes (для приветствия)," the conceited man replied (ответил). "It is to raise in salute (дабы поднимать ее в приветствии) when people acclaim (шумно приветствовать) me. Unfortunately (к сожалению), nobody at all ever passes this way (вообще никто никогда здесь не проходил)."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about (не понимал, о чем говорит тщеславный человек).
"Clap your hands, one against the other (хлопни, ударь ладонями друг по другу)," the conceited man now directed (приказал) him. 
1. The second planet was inhabited by a conceited man. "Ah! Ah! I am about to receive a visit from an admirer!" he exclaimed from afar, when he first saw the little prince coming.
For, to conceited men, all other men are admirers. 
"Good morning," said the little prince. "That is a queer hat you are wearing."
"It is a hat for salutes," the conceited man replied. "It is to raise in salute when people acclaim me. Unfortunately, nobody at all ever passes this way."
"Yes?" said the little prince, who did not understand what the conceited man was talking about.
"Clap your hands, one against the other," the conceited man now directed him. 

 
2. The little prince clapped his hands (хлопнул). The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute (поднял шляпу в скромном приветствии).
"This is more entertaining (куда занимательнее) than the visit to the king (чем визит к королю)," the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands (начал опять хлопать), one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise (после пяти минут таких упражнений) the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony (устал от монотонности игры).
"And what should one do to make the hat come down (что нужно сделать, дабы шляпа упала, опустилась)?" he asked. 
But the conceited man did not hear him (не слышал его). Conceited people never hear anything but praise (себялюбцы не слышат ничего, кроме похвалы).
"Do you really admire me very much (ты действительно мной восхищен)?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean - 'admire' (что значит — восхищен)?"
"To admire mean that you regard me (расцениваешь меня) as the handsomest (наиболее симпатичного), the best-dressed (наилучше одетого), the richest (наибогатейшего), and the most intelligent (самого умного) man on this planet."
"But you are the only man (единственный) on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness (сделай милость). Admire me just the same (именно так)."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly (слегка пожав плечами), "but what is there in that to interest you so much (что в этом такого интересного)?"
And the little prince went away (ушел).
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd (взрослые действительно очень странные)," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey (продолжил путешествие). 
2. The little prince clapped his hands. The conceited man raised his hat in a modest salute.
"This is more entertaining than the visit to the king," the little prince said to himself. And he began again to clap his hands, one against the other. The conceited man against raised his hat in salute.
After five minutes of this exercise the little prince grew tired of the game's monotony.
"And what should one do to make the hat come down?" he asked. 
But the conceited man did not hear him. Conceited people never hear anything but praise.
"Do you really admire me very much?" he demanded of the little prince.
"What does that mean - 'admire'?"
"To admire mean that you regard me as the handsomest, the best-dressed, the richest, and the most intelligent man on this planet."
"But you are the only man on your planet!"
"Do me this kindness. Admire me just the same."
"I admire you," said the little prince, shrugging his shoulders slightly, "but what is there in that to interest you so much?"
And the little prince went away.
"The grown-ups are certainly very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 12
1.The next planet was inhabited by a tippler (на следующей планете жил пьяница: досл. следующая планета была населена пьяницей). This was a very short visit (очень короткий визит), but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection (поверг в уныние).
"What are you doing there (что ты здесь делаешь)?" he said to the tippler, whom he found (которого он нашел) settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles (сидевшего в тишине перед коллекцией пустых бутылок) and also a collection of full bottles (а также полных).
"I am drinking (я пью)," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air (скорбно: досл. со скорбным воздухом). 
1.The next planet was inhabited by a tippler. This was a very short visit, but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection.
"What are you doing there?" he said to the tippler, whom he found settled down in silence before a collection of empty bottles and also a collection of full bottles.
"I am drinking," replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air. 

 
2. "Why are you drinking (почему ты пьешь)?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget (так я могу забыть)," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired (осведомился) the little prince, who already was sorry for him (который уже жалел его).
"Forget that I am ashamed (что мне стыдно)," the tippler confessed (сознался), hanging his head (свесив голову).
"Ashamed of what (стыдно чего)?" insisted (настаивал) the little prince, who wanted to help him (который хотел ему помочь).
"Ashamed of drinking (стыдно, что пью)!" The tippler brought his speech to an end (высказал все: досл. принес свою речь до конца), and shut himself up in an impregnable silence (и замолчал: досл. замкнул себя в неприступную тишину).
And the little prince went away (ушел прочь), puzzled (озадаченный).
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.
2. "Why are you drinking?" demanded the little prince.
"So that I may forget," replied the tippler.
"Forget what?" inquired the little prince, who already was sorry for him.
"Forget that I am ashamed," the tippler confessed, hanging his head.
"Ashamed of what?" insisted the little prince, who wanted to help him.
"Ashamed of drinking!" The tippler brought his speech to an end, and shut himself up in an impregnable silence.
And the little prince went away, puzzled.
"The grown-ups are certainly very, very odd," he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.  

Chapter 13
1. The fourth (четвертая) planet belonged to a businessman (принадлежала бизнесмену). This man was so much occupied (занят) that he did not even raise his head (даже не поднял головы) at the little prince's arrival (по прибытии маленького принца).
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out (погасла)."
"Three and two make five (3 + 2 = 5). Five and seven make twelve (5 + 7 = 12). Twelve and three make fifteen (12 + 3 = 15). Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two (15 + 7 = 22). Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight (22 + 6 = 28). I haven't time to light it again (у меня нет времени ее зажечь). Twenty-six and five make thirty-one (26 + 5 = 31). Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one (итого: досл. это делает 501 622 731)."
1. The fourth planet belonged to a businessman. This man was so much occupied that he did not even raise his head at the little prince's arrival.
"Good morning," the little prince said to him. "Your cigarette has gone out."
"Three and two make five. Five and seven make twelve. Twelve and three make fifteen. Good morning. Fifteen and seven make twenty-two. Twenty-two and six make twenty-eight. I haven't time to light it again. Twenty-six and five make thirty-one. Phew ! Then that makes five-hundred-and-one-million, six-hundred-twenty-two-thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one."  
 
2. "Five hundred million what (5 миллионов чего)?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there (ты все еще здесь)? Five-hundred-and-one million (501 миллион) - I can't stop (не могу остановиться)... 
I have so much to do (столько нужно сделать: досл. у меня есть так много делать)! I am concerned with matters of consequence (забочусь о делах особой важности). I don't amuse myself with balderdash (не отвлекаюсь на ерунду). Two and five make seven (2 + 5 = 7)..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had (никогда в своей жизни) let go of a question once he had asked it (не оставлял вопрос, однажды заданный). 
The businessman raised his head. 
"During the fifty-four years (54 года) that I have inhabited this planet, I have been disturbed only three times (меня беспокоили (отвлекали) только трижды). The first time was twenty-two years ago (первый раз 22 года назад), when some giddy goose (легкомысленный дурак (или пустоголовая гусыня)) fell from goodness knows where (неизвестно откуда). He made the most frightful noise (он поднял такой ужасный шум) that resounded all over the place (отзвуки которого были везде: досл. который «отзвучивал», «to sound» —  звучать, «to resound» —  звучать повторно), and I made four mistakes in my addition (допустил 4 ошибки в подсчетах). The second time, eleven years ago (11 лет назад), I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism (приступ ревматизма). I don't get enough exercise (мало двигался: досл. не делал достаточно упражнений). I have no time for loafing («ничегонеделания»). The third time (3 раз) — well, this is it (это он и есть)! I was saying, then (я говорил, значит), five-hundred-and-one millions — "
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace (осознал, что ему не будет покоя: досл. нет надежды быть оставленным в покое) until he answered this question (пока не ответит).
"Millions of those little objects (этих маленьких штучек)," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the sky (которые можно увидеть в небе)."
"Flies (мухи)?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects (сверкающие штучки)."
"Bees (пчелы)?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects (маленькие золотые штучки) that set lazy men to idle dreaming (которые располагают ленивых людей к бесполезным мечтаниям). As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars (имеете в виду звезды)?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do (что Вы делаете) with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate (точный)."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them (Ничего. Они мне принадлежат: досл. я ими владею)."
"You own the stars?"
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who — (но я уже видел короля, который —) "
"Kings do not own, they reign over (короли не владеют, они правят). It is a very different matter (разные вещи)."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars (и что хорошего во владении звездами)?"
"It  does me the good of making me rich (то, что я богат: досл. это делает мне хорошо делая меня богатым)."
"And what good does it do you to be rich (быть богатым)?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars (могу купить больше звезд: досл. это делает это возможным для меня купить больше звезд), if any are ever discovered (если какие-либо откроют)."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor tippler (рассуждает, как мой бедный пьяница)..." 
2. "Five hundred million what?" asked the little prince.
"Eh? Are you still there? Five-hundred-and-one million - I can't stop... 
I have so much to do! I am concerned with matters of consequence. I don't amuse myself with balderdash. Two and five make seven..."
"Five-hundred-and-one million what?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question once he had asked it. 
The businessman raised his head. 
"During the fifty-four years that I have inhabited this planet, I have been disturbed only three times. The first time was twenty-two years ago, when some giddy goose fell from goodness knows where. He made the most frightful noise that resounded all over the place, and I made four mistakes in my addition. The second time, eleven years ago, I was disturbed by an attack of rheumatism. I don't get enough exercise. I have no time for loafing. The third time - well, this is it! I was saying, then, five -hundred-and-one millions - "
"Millions of what?"
The businessman suddenly realized that there was no hope of being left in peace until he answered this question.
"Millions of those little objects," he said, "which one sometimes sees in the sky."
"Flies?"
"Oh, no. Little glittering objects."
"Bees?"
"Oh, no. Little golden objects that set lazy men to idle dreaming. As for me, I am concerned with matters of consequence. There is no time for idle dreaming in my life."
"Ah! You mean the stars?"
"Yes, that's it. The stars."
"And what do you do with five-hundred millions of stars?"
"Five-hundred-and-one million, six-hundred-twenty-two thousand, seven-hundred-thirty-one. I am concerned with matters of consequence: I am accurate."
"And what do you do with these stars?"
"What do I do with them?"
"Yes."
"Nothing. I own them."
"You own the stars?"
"Yes."
"But I have already seen a king who - "
"Kings do not own, they reign over. It is a very different matter."
"And what good does it do you to own the stars?"
"It does me the good of making me rich."
"And what good does it do you to be rich?"
"It makes it possible for me to buy more stars, if any are ever discovered."
"This man," the little prince said to himself, "reasons a little like my poor tippler..."
3. Nevertheless (все же), he still had some more questions (у него все еще были вопросы). 
"How is it possible for one to own the stars (как можно владеть звездами: досл. как это возможно для одного)?"
"To whom do they belong (кому они принадлежат)?" the businessman retorted (возразил), peevishly (раздраженно).
"I don't know. To nobody (не знаю. Никому)."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it (потому что я первый об этом полумал)."
"Is that all that is necessary (и это все, что нужно)?"
"Certainly (конечно). When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours (когда ты находишь бриллиант, который никому не принадлежит, — он твой). When you discover an island (открываешь остров) that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea (появляется идея) before any one else (прежде других), you take out a patent on it (получаешь патент): it is yours. So with me (так и я): I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them (никто раньше меня не додумался ими владеть)."
"Yes, that is true (правда)," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them (а что Вы с ними делаете)?"
"I administer them (управляю ими)," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them (считаю и пересчитываю). It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence (заинтересован в делах особой важности)." 
The little prince was still not satisfied (маленькому принцу было мало: досл. все еще не был удовлетворен). 
"If I owned a silk scarf (у меня есть шелковый шарф)," he said, "I could put it around my neck (я завязываю его на шее) and take it away with me (беру с собой). If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with me (вырвать цветок и забрать с собой). But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven (не можете сорвать звезды с небес)..."
"No. But I can put them in the bank (положить в банк)."
"Whatever does that mean (а это что значит)?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper (маленький листик). And then I put this paper in a drawer (ящик) and lock it with a key (запираю на ключ)."
"And that is all (и все?)?"
"That is enough (достаточно)," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining (смешно)," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic (скорее поэтично). But it is of no great consequence." 
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups (дела особой важности маленький принц представлял совсем не так, как взрослые). 
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation (разговор) with the businessman, "which I water (поливаю) every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows (кто его знает)). It is of some use (польза) to my volcanoes , and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them (от того, что я ими владею). But you are of no use to the stars (но звездам нет никакой пользы)..." 
The businessman opened his mouth (открыл рот), but he found nothing to say in answer (не нашел что сказать в ответ). 
And the little prince went away. 
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether (совершенно) extraordinary," he said simply (просто), talking to himself as he continued on his journey (разговаривая сам с собой и продолжая путешествие).
3. Nevertheless, he still had some more questions. 
"How is it possible for one to own the stars?"
"To whom do they belong?" the businessman retorted, peevishly.
"I don't know. To nobody."
"Then they belong to me, because I was the first person to think of it."
"Is that all that is necessary?"
"Certainly. When you find a diamond that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you discover an island that belongs to nobody, it is yours. When you get an idea before any one else, you take out a patent on it: it is yours. So with me: I own the stars, because nobody else before me ever thought of owning them."
"Yes, that is true," said the little prince. "And what do you do with them?"
"I administer them," replied the businessman. "I count them and recount them. It is difficult. But I am a man who is naturally interested in matters of consequence." 
The little prince was still not satisfied. 
"If I owned a silk scarf," he said, "I could put it around my neck and take it away with me. If I owned a flower, I could pluck that flower and take it away with me. But you cannot pluck the stars from heaven..."
"No. But I can put them in the bank."
"Whatever does that mean?"
"That means that I write the number of my stars on a little paper. And then I put this paper in a drawer and lock it with a key."
"And that is all?"
"That is enough," said the businessman.
"It is entertaining," thought the little prince. "It is rather poetic. But it is of no great consequence." 
On matters of consequence, the little prince had ideas which were very different from those of the grown-ups. 
"I myself own a flower," he continued his conversation with the businessman, "which I water every day. I own three volcanoes, which I clean out every week (for I also clean out the one that is extinct; one never knows). It is of some use to my volcanoes , and it is of some use to my flower, that I own them. But you are of no use to the stars..." 
The businessman opened his mouth, but he found nothing to say in answer. 
And the little prince went away. 
"The grown-ups are certainly altogether extraordinary," he said simply, talking to himself as he continued on his journey. 

Chapter 14
1. The fifth (пятая) planet was very strange (странная). It was the smallest of all (наименьшая изо всех). There was just enough room (как раз достаточно места) on it for a street lamp (уличного фонаря) and a lamplighter (фонарщика). The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of (маленький принц не мог объяснить, какая польза от: досл. был не в состоянии достигнуть какого-либо объяснения использования) a street lamp and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens (где-то в небесах), on a planet which had no people (без людей), and not one house (ни единого дома). But he said to himself, nevertheless (все же):
"It may well be (вполне может быть) that this man is absurd (ненормален). But he is not so (но не так) absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler (король, тщеславный человек, бизнесмен и пьяница). For at least his work has some meaning (его труд имеет хоть какой-то смысл). When he lights his street lamp (когда он зажигает фонарь), it is as if he brought one more star to life (он будто дает жизнь еще одной звезде), or one flower. When he puts out (гасит) his lamp, he sends (отправляет) the flower, or the star, to sleep (спать). That is a beautiful occupation (чудесное занятие). And since it is beautiful (поскольку это прекрасно), it is truly useful (это действительно полезно)."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully (почтенно) saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why (почему) have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders (таков порядок (так заведено))," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted (зажег) his lamp again. 
1. The fifth planet was very strange. It was the smallest of all. There was just enough room on it for a street lamp and a lamplighter. The little prince was not able to reach any explanation of the use of a street lamp and a lamplighter, somewhere in the heavens, on a planet which had no people, and not one house. But he said to himself, nevertheless:
"It may well be that this man is absurd. But he is not so absurd as the king, the conceited man, the businessman, and the tippler. For at least his work has some meaning. When he lights his street lamp, it is as if he brought one more star to life, or one flower. When he puts out his lamp, he sends the flower, or the star, to sleep. That is a beautiful occupation. And since it is beautiful, it is truly useful."
When he arrived on the planet he respectfully saluted the lamplighter.
"Good morning. Why have you just put out your lamp?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. "Good morning."
"What are the orders?"
"The orders are that I put out my lamp. Good evening."
And he lighted his lamp again.
 
2. "But why have you just lighted it again? (почему зажгли снова)"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. 
"I do not understand (не понимаю)," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand (нечего понимать: досл. есть ничего понимать)," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders (порядок — это порядок (ход вещей)). Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead (вытер лоб) with a handkerchief (носовым платком) decorated with red squares (украшенным красными звездами). 
"I follow a terrible profession (у меня ужасная профессия: досл. я следую ужасной профессии). In the old days (в прежние времена: досл. в старые дни) it was reasonable (это было разумно). I put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation (весь остаток дня я отдыхал: досл. имел для отдыха) and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time (ход вещей изменился с тех пор)?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the tragedy (вот в чем беда)! From year to year (из года в год) the planet has turned more rapidly (планета поворачивалась более резко) and the orders have not been changed!"
"Then what (что тогда)?" asked the little prince.
"Then — the planet now makes a complete turn every minute (теперь планета делает полный оборот за 1 минуту), and I no longer have a single second for repose (у меня нет ни единой секунды для отдыха). Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!"
"That is very funny (забавно)! A day lasts (день длится) only one minute, here where you live (здесь, где Вы живете)!"
"It is not funny at all (вовсе)!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking together a month has gone by (пока мы разговаривали, прошел месяц)."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes (30 минут). Thirty days. Good evening."
2. "But why have you just lighted it again?"
"Those are the orders," replied the lamplighter. 
"I do not understand," said the little prince.
"There is nothing to understand," said the lamplighter. "Orders are orders. Good morning."
And he put out his lamp.
Then he mopped his forehead with a handkerchief decorated with red squares. 
"I follow a terrible profession. In the old days it was reasonable. I put the lamp out in the morning, and in the evening I lighted it again. I had the rest of the day for relaxation and the rest of the night for sleep."
"And the orders have been changed since that time?"
"The orders have not been changed," said the lamplighter. "That is the tragedy! From year to year the planet has turned more rapidly and the orders have not been changed!"
"Then what?" asked the little prince.
"Then-- the planet now makes a complete turn every minute, and I no longer have a single second for repose. Once every minute I have to light my lamp and put it out!"
"That is very funny! A day lasts only one minute, here where you live!"
"It is not funny at all!" said the lamplighter. "While we have been talking together a month has gone by."
"A month?"
"Yes, a month. Thirty minutes. Thirty days. Good evening."
 3. And he lighted his lamp again. As the little prince watched him (наблюдал за ним), he felt that he loved (он чувствовал, что он любит) this lamplighter who was so faithful (который так верен) to his orders. He remembered the sunsets (он помнил закаты) which he himself had gone to seek (которые он сам отправился искать (к которым стремился)), in other days, merely by pulling up his chair (в основном передвигая стул); and he wanted to help (захотел помочь) his friend. 
"You know (знаете)," he said, "I can tell you a way (могу подсказать: досл. могу сказать путь) you can rest whenever you want to (отдыхать, когда бы Вы ни захотели)..."
"I always (всегда) want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible (это возможно) for a man to be faithful and lazy (ленивым) at the same time (в одно и то же время). 
The little prince went on (продолжил) with his explanation (объяснение):
"Your planet is so small (так мала) that three strides will take you all the way around it (можно обойти в три шага). To be always in the sunshine (находиться в солнечном свете), you need only walk along rather slowly (нужно только идти довольно медленно). When you want to rest, you will walk (будешь идти) - and the day will last as long as you like (день будет длиться столько, сколько ты захочешь)."
"That doesn't do me much good (мне о этого мало проку: досл. это не делает мне много хорошего)," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in life is to sleep (одна вещь, которую я люблю в жизни, это сон)."
"Then you're unlucky (тогда Вам не повезло: досл. ты неудачлив)," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp. 
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey (продолжал дальше свое путешествие), "that man would be scorned by all the others (был бы осмеян другими): by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless (и все же) he is the only one of them all (он единственный из всех их) who does not seem to me ridiculous (кто для меня не смешен). Perhaps that is because (может это потому) he is thinking of something else besides himself (он думает о чем-то еще, кроме себя)." 
He breathed a sigh of regret (вздохнул: досл. выдохнул вздох сожаления), and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend (кого я бы сделал моим другом). But his planet is indeed (в самом деле) too small. There is no room on it for two people (нет места для двоих)..." 
What the little prince did not dare confess (не осмелился сознаться) was that he was sorry most of all to leave this planet (сожалел о том, что покидает эту планету, больше всего), because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets (она освещалась каждый день 1440 закатами)! 
3. And he lighted his lamp again. As the little prince watched him, he felt that he loved this lamplighter who was so faithful to his orders. He remembered the sunsets which he himself had gone to seek, in other days, merely by pulling up his chair; and he wanted to help his friend. 
"You know," he said, "I can tell you a way you can rest whenever you want to..."
"I always want to rest," said the lamplighter.
For it is possible for a man to be faithful and lazy at the same time. 
The little prince went on with his explanation:
"Your planet is so small that three strides will take you all the way around it. To be always in the sunshine, you need only walk along rather slowly. When you want to rest, you will walk - and the day will last as long as you like."
"That doesn't do me much good," said the lamplighter. "The one thing I love in life is to sleep."
"Then you're unlucky," said the little prince.
"I am unlucky," said the lamplighter. "Good morning."
And he put out his lamp. 
"That man," said the little prince to himself, as he continued farther on his journey, "that man would be scorned by all the others: by the king, by the conceited man, by the tippler, by the businessman. Nevertheless he is the only one of them all who does not seem to me ridiculous. Perhaps that is because he is thinking of something else besides himself." 
He breathed a sigh of regret, and said to himself, again:
"That man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend. But his planet is indeed too small. There is no room on it for two people..." 
What the little prince did not dare confess was that he was sorry most of all to leave this planet, because it was blest every day with 1440 sunsets!

Chapter 15
1. The sixth (шестая) planet was ten times larger than the last one (в десять раз больше предыдущей). It was inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books (многотомные книги).
"Oh, look (посмотри)! Here is an explorer (исследователь)!" he exclaimed to himself (воскликнул сам себе) when he saw the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table (сел на стол) and panted a little (тяжело и часто дышал немного). He had already traveled so much and so far (он у же так много и так далеко прошел (путешествовал))! 
1. The sixth planet was ten times larger than the last one. It was inhabited by an old gentleman who wrote voluminous books.
"Oh, look! Here is an explorer!" he exclaimed to himself when he saw the little prince coming.
The little prince sat down on the table and panted a little. He had already traveled so much and so far!
 
2. "Where do you come from (откуда ты пришел)?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book (что это за большая книга)?" said the little prince. "What are you doing (что Вы делаете)?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer (кто такой географ)?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar (ученый) who knows the location (знает месторасположение) of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts (морей, рек, городов, гор и пустынь)."
"That is very interesting (это очень интересно)," said the little prince. 
"Here at last (наконец) is a man who has a real profession (человек, у которого настоящая профессия)!" 
And he cast a look around him (оглянулся: досл. бросил взгляд кругом него) at the planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet (наиболее красивая и величественная планета) that he had ever seen (которую он когда-либо видел).
"Your planet is very beautiful (прекрасна)," he said. "Has it any oceans (на ней есть океаны)?"
"I couldn't tell you (не могу сказать)," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed (был разочарован). "Has it any mountains (а горы: досл. имеет она какие-либо горы)?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either (также)."
"But you are a geographer (но Вы же географ)!"
"Exactly (правильно)," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer (но не исследователь). I haven't a single explorer on my planet (нет ни единого исследователя на моей планете). It is not the geographer (это не географ) who goes out to count (кто отправляется считать) the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about (географ слишком важен дабы везде слоняться). He does not leave his desk (не встает из-за стола: досл. не покидает свою парту). But he receives the explorers in his study (он получает исследователей для научной работы). He asks them questions (задает вопросы), and he notes down (записывает) what they recall of their travels (то, что они вспоминают о своих путешествиях). And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting to him (воспоминания кого-то среди них кажутся ему интересными), the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral character (убедиться в моральности исследователя: досл. требует подтверждения морального характера исследователя)."
"Why is that (зачем)?"
"Because an explorer who told lies (который лжет: досл.говорит неправду) would bring disaster on the books of the geographer (принесет несчастья книгам географа). So would an explorer who drank too much (Так может быть, если исследователь пьет)."
"Why is that (почему)?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double (у пьяного в глазах двоится: досл. видит дважды). Then the geographer would note down two mountains (записать две горы) in a place where there was only one (на месте одной)."
"I know some one (знаю одного человека)," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer (был бы плохим исследователем)."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good (моральность подтверждена: досл. моральный характер показывается как хороший), an inquiry is ordered into his discovery (убедиться в истинности его открытия)." 
"One goes to see it (нужно пойти увидеть его)?"
"No. That would be too complicated (было бы слишком сложно). But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs (у исследователя требуют предоставить доказательства). For example, if the discovery in question (открытие под вопросом) is that of a large mountain (это большая гора), one requires that large stones be brought back from it (требуют большой камень с этой горы)."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement (внезапно заволновался).
"But you - you come from far away (ты, ты пришел издалека)! You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me (должен описать планету)!"
And, having opened his big register (открыл свой большой журнал), the geographer sharpened his pencil (заточил свой карандаш). 
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil (факты сначала записывают карандашом). One waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink (ждут подтверждения перед тем, как записать это чернилами). 
2. "Where do you come from?" the old gentleman said to him.
"What is that big book?" said the little prince. "What are you doing?"
"I am a geographer," the old gentleman said to him.
"What is a geographer?" asked the little prince.
"A geographer is a scholar who knows the location of all the seas, rivers, towns, mountains, and deserts."
"That is very interesting," said the little prince. 
"Here at last is a man who has a real profession!" 
And he cast a look around him at the planet of the geographer. It was the most magnificent and stately planet that he had ever seen.
"Your planet is very beautiful," he said. "Has it any oceans?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"Ah!" The little prince was disappointed. "Has it any mountains?"
"I couldn't tell you," said the geographer.
"And towns, and rivers, and deserts?"
"I couldn't tell you that, either."
"But you are a geographer!"
"Exactly," the geographer said. "But I am not an explorer. I haven't a single explorer on my planet. It is not the geographer who goes out to count the towns, the rivers, the mountains, the seas, the oceans, and the deserts. The geographer is much too important to go loafing about. He does not leave his desk. But he receives the explorers in his study. He asks them questions, and he notes down what they recall of their travels. And if the recollections of any one among them seem interesting to him, the geographer orders an inquiry into that explorer's moral character."
"Why is that?"
"Because an explorer who told lies would bring disaster on the books of the geographer. So would an explorer who drank too much."
"Why is that?" asked the little prince.
"Because intoxicated men see double. Then the geographer would note down two mountains in a place where there was only one."
"I know some one," said the little prince, "who would make a bad explorer."
"That is possible. Then, when the moral character of the explorer is shown to be good, an inquiry is ordered into his discovery." 
"One goes to see it?"
"No. That would be too complicated. But one requires the explorer to furnish proofs. For example, if the discovery in question is that of a large mountain, one requires that large stones be brought back from it."
The geographer was suddenly stirred to excitement.
"But you - you come from far away! You are an explorer! You shall describe your planet to me!"
And, having opened his big register, the geographer sharpened his pencil. 
The recitals of explorers are put down first in pencil. One waits until the explorer has furnished proofs, before putting them down in ink.
3. "Well (ну)?" said the geographer expectantly (в ожидании).
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting (не очень интересно). It is all so small (все очень маленькое). I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows (кто его знает)."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers (мы не записываем цветов)," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet (цветок — это самое красивое на моей планете)!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are ephemeral (эфемерны, недолговечны)."
"What does that mean (что это значит) — 'ephemeral'?" 
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are most concerned with matters of consequence (географии — это книги, которые заняты делами особой важности). They never become old-fashioned (они никогда не устаревают). It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position (очень редко горы меняют месторасположение). It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters (океаны высыхают). We write of eternal things (мы пишем о вечном)."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again (потухший вулкан может «ожить» опять)," the little prince interrupted (прервал). "What does that mean — 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive (потухший он или нет), it comes to the same thing for us (нам все равно: досл. для нас идет как одна и та же вещь)," said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain (для нас важны горы). It does not change (они не меняются)."
"But what does that mean — 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it (не оставлял однажды заданный вопрос).
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance (такой, какой пребывает в опасности быстрого исчезновения).'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is."
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world (у нее только 4 шипа, чтобы защитить себя от мира). And I have left her on my planet, all alone (оставил ее на планете, совсем одну)!" 
That was his first moment of regret (первое сожаление: досл. момент сожаления). But he took courage once more (набрался храбрости еще раз).
"What place would you advise me to visit now (какую планету Вы бы посоветовали мне посетить)?" he asked.
"The planet Earth (планету Земля)," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation (у нее хорошая репутация)."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower (ушел думая о цветке). 
3. "Well?" said the geographer expectantly.
"Oh, where I live," said the little prince, "it is not very interesting. It is all so small. I have three volcanoes. Two volcanoes are active and the other is extinct. But one never knows."
"One never knows," said the geographer.
"I have also a flower."
"We do not record flowers," said the geographer.
"Why is that? The flower is the most beautiful thing on my planet!"
"We do not record them," said the geographer, "because they are ephemeral."
"What does that mean-- 'ephemeral'?" 
"Geographies," said the geographer, "are the books which, of all books, are most concerned with matters of consequence. They never become old-fashioned. It is very rarely that a mountain changes its position. It is very rarely that an ocean empties itself of its waters. We write of eternal things."
"But extinct volcanoes may come to life again," the little prince interrupted. "What does that mean - 'ephemeral'?"
"Whether volcanoes are extinct or alive, it comes to the same thing for us," said the geographer. "The thing that matters to us is the mountain. It does not change."
"But what does that mean - 'ephemeral'?" repeated the little prince, who never in his life had let go of a question, once he had asked it.
"It means, 'which is in danger of speedy disappearance.'"
"Is my flower in danger of speedy disappearance?"
"Certainly it is."
"My flower is ephemeral," the little prince said to himself, "and she has only four thorns to defend herself against the world. And I have left her on my planet, all alone!" 
That was his first moment of regret. But he took courage once more.
"What place would you advise me to visit now?" he asked.
"The planet Earth," replied the geographer. "It has a good reputation."
And the little prince went away, thinking of his flower.



Chapter 16
1. So then the seventh planet was the Earth (наконец седьмой планетой была Земля).
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet (не просто обычная планета)! One can count (можно подсчитать: досл. один может подсчитать), there 111 kings (королей) (not forgetting, to be sure (не забывая, естественно), the Negro kings among them (короли африканских стран в том числе)), 7000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men - that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups (в общем, около 2 млрд. взрослых). 
1. So then the seventh planet was the Earth.
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet! One can count, there 111 kings (not forgetting, to be sure, the Negro kings among them), 7000 geographers, 900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000 conceited men - that is to say, about 2,000,000,000 grown-ups.
 
2. To give you an idea of the size of the Earth (чтобы вы представили себе размеры Земли: досл. дать вам идею), I will tell you that before the invention of electricity (я скажу, что до открытия электричества) it was necessary to maintain (необходимо содержать), over the whole of the six continents (по всем 6 континентам), a veritable army (настоящую армию) of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps. 
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle (вблизи это было бы роскошное зрелище: досл. «видимое» из незначительного расстояния, это сделало бы роскошное представление). The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera (движение этой армии было бы упорядочено, как в балете). First would come the turn of the lamplighters (сначала бы шли фонарщики: досл. первая пришла бы очередь) of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight (засветив свои фонари), these would go off to sleep (они пошли бы спать). 
Next (следующие), the lamplighters of China (Китай) and Siberia would enter (вошли бы) for their steps in the dance (танцуя), and then they too would be waved back into the wings (скрылись бы за кулисами). After that (после этого) would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the stage (никогда не ошиблись бы в порядке выхода на сцену). It would be magnificent (удивительно).
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole (и только человек, ответственный за единственный фонарь на Северном полюсе), and his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole - only these two (только эти двое) would live free from toil and care (жили бы без забот: досл. жили бы свободными от тяжелой работы и заботы): they would be busy twice a year (они были бы заняты дважды в год).
2. To give you an idea of the size of the Earth, I will tell you that before the invention of electricity it was necessary to maintain, over the whole of the six continents, a veritable army of 462,511 lamplighters for the street lamps. 
Seen from a slight distance, that would make a splendid spectacle. The movements of this army would be regulated like those of the ballet in the opera. First would come the turn of the lamplighters of New Zealand and Australia. Having set their lamps alight, these would go off to sleep. 
Next, the lamplighters of China and Siberia would enter for their steps in the dance, and then they too would be waved back into the wings. After that would come the turn of the lamplighters of Russia and the Indies; then those of Africa and Europe, then those of South America; then those of South America; then those of North America. And never would they make a mistake in the order of their entry upon the stage. It would be magnificent.
Only the man who was in charge of the single lamp at the North Pole, and his colleague who was responsible for the single lamp at the South Pole - only these two would live free from toil and care: they would be busy twice a year.  

Chapter 17
1. When one wishes to play the wit (блеснуть остроумием: «wit» — разум), he sometimes wanders a little from the truth (досл. «уходит немного от правды»). I have not been altogether honest (я не был совсем честен) in what I have told you about the lamplighters (в том, что я рассказал вам о фонарщиках). And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it (я осознаю, что могу создать неправильное представление о нашей планете для тех, кто с ней не знаком: досл. «рискую дать фальшивую идею о…»). Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth (люди занимают очень мало места на Земле). If the two billion inhabitants (2 биллиона жителей) who people its surface (заселяют ее поверхность: «people» не только «люди», но и «заселять») were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together (все стали толпой), as they do for some big public assembly (как они то делают на публичных собраниях), they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide (они легко поместились бы на площади 20 миль длиной и 20 шириной). All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet (все человечество могло бы поместиться на маленьком тихоокеанском островке). 
The grown-ups, to be sure (естественно), will not believe you when you tell them that (не поверят, если вы им это скажете). They imagine that they fill a great deal of space (им кажется, что они занимают огромное пространство). They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs (они возомнили себя такими же важными, как и баобабы). You should advise them, then, to make their own calculations (можете предложить им провести свои подсчеты). They adore figures (они обожают цифры), and that will please them (им это понравится). But do not waste your time on this extra task (не тратьте время на это задание). It is unnecessary (это не понадобится). You have, I know, confidence in me (я знаю, что вы мне доверяете).
1. When one wishes to play the wit, he sometimes wanders a little from the truth. I have not been altogether honest in what I have told you about the lamplighters. And I realize that I run the risk of giving a false idea of our planet to those who do not know it. Men occupy a very small place upon the Earth. If the two billion inhabitants who people its surface were all to stand upright and somewhat crowded together, as they do for some big public assembly, they could easily be put into one public square twenty miles long and twenty miles wide. All humanity could be piled up on a small Pacific islet. 
The grown-ups, to be sure, will not believe you when you tell them that. They imagine that they fill a great deal of space. They fancy themselves as important as the baobabs. You should advise them, then, to make their own calculations. They adore figures, and that will please them. But do not waste your time on this extra task. It is unnecessary. You have, I know, confidence in me. 
2. When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people (был удивлен, не увидев людей). He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet (он уже начинал бояться, что прибыл не на ту планету), when a coil of gold (клубок золота), the colour of the moonlight (цвета лунного сияния), flashed across the sand (вспыхнул на песке).
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously (вежливо).
"Good evening," said the snake (змея).
"What planet is this on which I have come down? (что это за планета (на которую я прилетел)?)" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth (так на Земле нет людей)?"
"This is the desert (пустыня). There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large (большая)," said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone (присел на камень), and raised his eyes toward the sky (поднял в небо глаза). 
"I wonder (интересно)," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us may find his own again (зажигаются ли звезды в небе для того, чтобы однажды один из нас мог отыскать свою опять)... Look at my planet. It is right there above us (прямо над нами). But how far away it is! (но как она далеко)""It is beautiful (прекрасна)," the snake said. "What has brought you here (как тебя сюда занесло: досл. что тебя сюда принесло)?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower (у меня были проблемы с цветком)," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake. 
And they were both silent (оба молчали). 
"Where are the men (где люди)?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again (возобновил разговор). "It is a little lonely in the desert (немного одиноко в пустыне)..."
"It is also lonely among men (среди людей тоже одиноко)," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time (долго смотрел на нее). 
2. When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was very much surprised not to see any people. He was beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong planet, when a coil of gold, the colour of the moonlight, flashed across the sand.
"Good evening," said the little prince courteously.
"Good evening," said the snake.
"What planet is this on which I have come down?" asked the little prince.
"This is the Earth; this is Africa," the snake answered.
"Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth?"
"This is the desert. There are no people in the desert. The Earth is large," said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his eyes toward the sky. 
"I wonder," he said, "whether the stars are set alight in heaven so that one day each one of us may find his own again... Look at my planet. It is right there above us. But how far away it is!""It is beautiful," the snake said. "What has brought you here?"
"I have been having some trouble with a flower," said the little prince.
"Ah!" said the snake. 
And they were both silent. 
"Where are the men?" the little prince at last took up the conversation again. "It is a little lonely in the desert..."
"It is also lonely among men," the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time.
 
3."You are a funny animal (забавное животное)," he said at last (наконец-то). "You are no thicker than a finger (не толще пальца)..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king (я более могущественна, чем палец короля)," said the snake. 
The little prince smiled (улыбнулся). 
"You are not very powerful (ты не очень могущественна). You haven't even any feet (у тебя даже ног нет). You cannot even travel (ты даже путешествовать не можешь)..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you (я могу отнести тебя дальше, чем любой корабль)," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle (она обвилась вокруг лодыжки маленького принца), like a golden bracelet. 
"Whomever I touch (к кому бы я ни прикоснулась), I send back to the earth from whence he came (я отправляю его в землю, откуда он и пришел)," the snake spoke again. "But you are innocent (невинен) and true (правдивый), and you come from a star..." 
The little prince made no reply (не ответил).
"You move me to pity (мне тебя жаль: досл. ты двигаешь меня к жалости) - you are so weak (так беспомощен, слаб) on this Earth made of granite," the snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet (если станешь слишком скучать по своей планете). I can - "
"Oh! I understand you very well (понимаю очень хорошо)," said the little prince. "But why do you always speak in riddles (почему ты постоянно говоришь загадками)?"
"I solve them all (я из разгадываю)," said the snake.
And they were both silent. 
3."You are a funny animal," he said at last. "You are no thicker than a finger..."
"But I am more powerful than the finger of a king," said the snake. 
The little prince smiled. 
"You are not very powerful. You haven't even any feet. You cannot even travel..."
"I can carry you farther than any ship could take you," said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince's ankle, like a golden bracelet. 
"Whomever I touch, I send back to the earth from whence he came," the snake spoke again. "But you are innocent and true, and you come from a star..." 
The little prince made no reply.
"You move me to pity - you are so weak on this Earth made of granite," the snake said. "I can help you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your own planet. I can - "
"Oh! I understand you very well," said the little prince. "But why do you always speak in riddles?"
"I solve them all," said the snake.
And they were both silent.   
  

Chapter 18
1.The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower (пересек пустыню и встретил только один цветок). 
It was a flower with three petals (это был цветок с тремя лепестками), a flower of no account at all (ничего особенного собой не представляющий). 
1.The little prince crossed the desert and met with only one flower. 
It was a flower with three petals, a flower of no account at all.
 
2."Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men (а где люди)?" the little prince asked, politely. 
The flower had once seen a caravan passing (цветок однажды видел проходящий мимо караван). 
"Men?" she echoed (люди – отозвался цветок). "I think there are six or seven of them in existence (думаю, шестеро или семеро их существует). I saw them, several years ago (видел их, несколько лет тому назад). But one never knows where to find them (но никто не знает, где их найти). The wind blows them away (ветер их унес). They have no roots (у них нет корней), and that makes their life very difficult (это усложняет им жизнь: досл. это делает их жизнь очень тяжелой)."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower. 
2."Good morning," said the little prince.
"Good morning," said the flower.
"Where are the men?" the little prince asked, politely. 
The flower had once seen a caravan passing. 
"Men?" she echoed. "I think there are six or seven of them in existence. I saw them, several years ago. But one never knows where to find them. The wind blows them away. They have no roots, and that makes their life very difficult."
"Goodbye," said the little prince.
"Goodbye," said the flower.

Chapter 19
1. After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain (после этого маленький принц взобрался на высокую гору). The only mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees (единственными горами, ему известными, были три вулкана, которые доходили ему до колен). And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool (использовал потухший вулкан как скамеечку для ног). "From a mountain as high as this one (с такой высокой горы, как эта)," he said to himself (сказал себе), "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance (я смогу увидеть всю планету одним взглядом), and all the people..."
1. After that, the little prince climbed a high mountain. The only mountains he had ever known were the three volcanoes, which came up to his knees. And he used the extinct volcano as a footstool. "From a mountain as high as this one," he said to himself, "I shall be able to see the whole planet at one glance, and all the people..."  
 
2. But he saw nothing (ничего не увидел), save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles (из-за горных вершин, острых, как иглы). 
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning - Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you (ты кто)?" said the little prince.
"Who are you - Who are you - Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone (будь моим другом, я так одинок)," he said.
"I am all alone - all alone - all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet (странная планета)!" he thought (подумал). 
"It is altogether dry (она и сухая), and altogether pointed (и остроконечная), and altogether harsh and forbidding (и суровая и пугающая одновременно). And the people have no imagination (и людей никакого воображения). They repeat whatever one says to them (они повторяют все, что им ни скажи)... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak (она всегда говорила первая)..." 
2. But he saw nothing, save peaks of rock that were sharpened like needles. 
"Good morning," he said courteously.
"Good morning--Good morning - Good morning," answered the echo.
"Who are you?" said the little prince.
"Who are you - Who are you - Who are you?" answered the echo.
"Be my friends. I am all alone," he said.
"I am all alone - all alone - all alone," answered the echo.
"What a queer planet!" he thought. 
"It is altogether dry, and altogether pointed, and altogether harsh and forbidding. And the people have no imagination. They repeat whatever one says to them... On my planet I had a flower; she always was the first to speak..."

Chapter 20
1. But it happened (но случилось так) that after walking for a long time (после долгого хождения) through sand, and rocks, and snow (по песках, камнях, снегах: досл. сквозь пески…), the little prince at last (наконец) came upon a road (дорога). And all roads lead to the abodes (жилище) of men.
"Good morning," he said. 
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses (сад, весь в цветущих розах).
"Good morning," said the roses. 
The little prince gazed (пристально поглядел, «уставился») at them. They all looked like (похожи на) his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck (требовал, пораженный).
"We are roses," the roses said. 
And he was overcome with sadness (его одолела грусть). His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind (единственная такая) in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them (их было здесь пять тысяч), all alike (все одинаковые), in one single garden (в одном единственном саду)! 
1. But it happened that after walking for a long time through sand, and rocks, and snow, the little prince at last came upon a road. And all roads lead to the abodes of men.
"Good morning," he said. 
He was standing before a garden, all a-bloom with roses.
"Good morning," said the roses. 
The little prince gazed at them. They all looked like his flower.
"Who are you?" he demanded, thunderstruck.
"We are roses," the roses said. 
And he was overcome with sadness. His flower had told him that she was the only one of her kind in all the universe. And here were five thousand of them, all alike, in one single garden!
 
2. "She would be very much annoyed (она была бы очень раздосадована)," he said to himself, "if she should see that (увидь она это)... she would cough most dreadfully (кашляла бы еще ужаснее), and she would pretend that she was dying (притворялась бы, что умирает), to avoid being laughed at (чтобы избежать насмешки). And I should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life (а я притворялся бы, что ухаживаю за ней, спасая ее: досл. ухаживал бы ее назад к жизни) - for if I did not do that, to humble (смириться) myself also, she would really allow herself to die (позволит себе умереть)..." 
Then he went on with his reflections (продолжал размышлять): 
"I thought that I was rich (мне казалось, я богат), with a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose (все, что у меня было — это обычная роза). A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees (три вулкана, мне по колени)- and one of them perhaps (возможно) extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince (не такой уж я великий принц: досл. это не делает меня очень большим принцем)..." 
And he lay down in the grass and cried (лег на траву и заплакал). 
2. "She would be very much annoyed," he said to himself, "if she should see that... she would cough most dreadfully, and she would pretend that she was dying, to avoid being laughed at. And I should be obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life - for if I did not do that, to humble myself also, she would really allow herself to die..." 
Then he went on with his reflections: 
"I thought that I was rich, with a flower that was unique in all the world; and all I had was a common rose. A common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to my knees - and one of them perhaps extinct forever... that doesn't make me a very great prince..." 
And he lay down in the grass and cried. 

Chapter 21
1. It was then that the fox appeared (потом появилась лиса: досл. это было потом, что лиса появилась).
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw nothing (несмотря на то, что никого вокруг не видел: досл. когда он оборачивался по кругу он видел ничего).
"I am right here (я прямо здесь)," the voice (голос) said, "under the apple tree (под яблоней)."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added (добавил), "You are very pretty to look at (ты хорошенький(ая): досл. ты очень миленький смотреть на)." 
1. It was then that the fox appeared.
"Good morning," said the fox.
"Good morning," the little prince responded politely, although when he turned around he saw nothing.
"I am right here," the voice said, "under the apple tree."
"Who are you?" asked the little prince, and added, "You are very pretty to look at." 
 
2. "I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me (поиграй со мной: досл. подойди и поиграй со мной)," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy (несчастен)."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed (меня не приручили)."
"Ah! Please excuse me (извини)," said the little prince. 
But, after some thought (немного подумав: досл. после нескольких мыслей), he added:
"What does that mean (что это значит) - 'tame'?"
"You do not live here (ты здесь не живешь)," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for (что ты ищешь: досл. что это есть, что ты ищешь)?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns (ружья, пистолеты), and they hunt (охотятся). It is very disturbing (очень беспокоит). They also raise chickens (разводят цыплят). These are their only interests (это их единственное занятие (интерес)). Are you looking for chickens (ищешь цыплят)?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends (ищу друзей). What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected (это действие, которое часто игнорируют)," said the fox. It means to establish ties (установить связи)."
"'To establish ties'?"
"Just that (именно)," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more (для меня ты все еще ничего больше) than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys (как маленький мальчик, точно такой же, как и тысячи других). And I have no need of you (ты мне не нужен: досл. у меня неь необходимости тебя). And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other (мы будем друг другу нужны). To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand (начинаю понимать)," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things (на земле всякое бывает: досл. кто-то может увидеть всякие виды вещей)."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince. 
The fox seemed perplexed (озадаченной), and very curious (заинтересованной).
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters (охотники) on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect (ничто не совершенно)," sighed the fox.
2. "I am a fox," said the fox.
"Come and play with me," proposed the little prince. "I am so unhappy."
"I cannot play with you," the fox said. "I am not tamed."
"Ah! Please excuse me," said the little prince. 
But, after some thought, he added:
"What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"You do not live here," said the fox. "What is it that you are looking for?"
"I am looking for men," said the little prince. "What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"Men," said the fox. "They have guns, and they hunt. It is very disturbing. They also raise chickens. These are their only interests. Are you looking for chickens?"
"No," said the little prince. "I am looking for friends. What does that mean - 'tame'?"
"It is an act too often neglected," said the fox. It means to establish ties."
"'To establish ties'?"
"Just that," said the fox. "To me, you are still nothing more than a little boy who is just like a hundred thousand other little boys. And I have no need of you. And you, on your part, have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be unique in all the world..."
"I am beginning to understand," said the little prince. "There is a flower... I think that she has tamed me..."
"It is possible," said the fox. "On the Earth one sees all sorts of things."
"Oh, but this is not on the Earth!" said the little prince. 
The fox seemed perplexed, and very curious.
"On another planet?"
"Yes."
"Are there hunters on this planet?"
"No."
"Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?"
"No."
"Nothing is perfect," sighed the fox.  

3. But he came back to his idea (он вернулся к своей мысли). 
"My life is very monotonous (однообразна)," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike (все цыплята одинаковы), and all the men are just alike. And, in consequence (в результате), I am a little bored (мне немного скучно). But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun came to shine on my life (все равно, что солнце озарит мою жизнь: досл. солнце придет осветить). I shall know the sound of a step (буду знать звук шагов) that will be different from all the others (которые будут отличаться от всех остальных). Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground (будут заставлять меня прятаться: досл. отошлют меня спешить обратно под землю). Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow (твои же будут звучать для меня, как музыка за пределами моей норы). And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder (видишь хлебные поля вон там внизу)? I do not eat bread (хлеб). Wheat is of no use to me (мне пшеница не нужна: досл. от пшеницы мне никакой пользы). The wheat fields have nothing to say to me (ни о чем мне не говорят). And that is sad (печально). But you have hair that is the colour of gold (золотистые волосы). Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you (будет напоминать о тебе: досл. будет приносить меня назад к мыслям о тебе). And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat (я полюблю слушать ветер в пшенице)..." 
The fox gazed (пристально смотреть) at the little prince, for a long time. 
"Please - tame me!" he said.
"I want to (я хочу), very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time (у меня мало времени). I have friends to discover (найти друзей: досл. открыть друзей (как открыть новый остров)), and a great many things to understand (много понять)."
"One only understands the things that one tames (мы понимаем только то, что приручили)," said the fox. "Men have no more time to understand anything (у людей нет времени что-либо понимать). They buy things all ready made at the shops (покупают готовое в магазине). But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship (нет такого магазина, в котором можно купить дружбу), and so men have no friends any more (потому у людей больше нет друзей). If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient (терпеливый)," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little distance from me - like that - in the grass (сначала сядешь недалеко от меня — как сейчас — на траве). I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye (буду поглядывать: досл. смотреть уголками глаз), and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings (слова приводят к непониманию: досл. слова — источник непонимания). But you will sit a little closer (немного ближе) to me, every day..." 
The next day the little prince came back (вернулся). 
"It would have been better (было бы лучше) to come back at the same hour (возвращаться в одно и то же время)," said the fox. 
"If, for example (например), you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy (тогда в три часа я уже буду счастливым). I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances (буду счастливее и счастливее, когда будет приближаться время). At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying (уже буду волноваться) and jumping about («прыгать от нетерпения»). I shall show you how happy I am (покажу, как я счастлив)! But if you come at just any time (в разное время), I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you (в котором часу мое сердце будет готово приветствовать тебя)... One must observe the proper rites (нужно соблюдать должную церемонию)..."
"What is a rite (церемония)?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected (это тоже действие, которое часто игнорируется)," said the fox. "They are what make one day different from other days (то, что делает один день не таким, как другой), one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far as the vineyards (могу добраться до винного двора). But if the hunters danced at just any time (если будут танцевать в разное время), every day would be like every other day (каждый день будет такой, как и другие), and I should never have any vacation (отдых, каникулы) at all." 
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near (пришло время отбытия) - "Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry (заплачу)."
"It is your own fault (твоя собственная вина)," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of harm (я не желал тебе зла: досл. никогда не хотел какого-либо вида вреда); but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry (почти плачешь: досл. собираешься плакать)!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all (это не принесло тебе ничего хорошего)!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the colour of the wheat fields (хотя бы цвет пшеничного поля)." And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses (посмотри на розы). You will understand now that yours is unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret (секретный подарок)." 
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. 
"You are not at all like my rose (вы не такие, как моя роза)," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew him (как моя лиса, когда я ее впервые увидел). He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world." 
And the roses were very much embarrassed (смутились). 
"You are beautiful, but you are empty (пусты)," he went on. "One could not die for you (ради вас никто не умрет). To be sure, an ordinary passerby (обычный прохожий) would think that my rose looked just like you - the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone (сама по себе) she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered (ее я поливал); because it is she that I have put under the glass globe (ее помещал под стеклянный колпак); because it is she that I have sheltered behind the screen (прикрывал ширмой); because it is for her (для нее) that I have killed (уничтожил) the caterpillars (гусениц) (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies (за исключением двух или трех, которых мы сохранили, дабы они стали бабочками)); because it is she that I have listened to (ее я слушал), when she grumbled (ворчала), or boasted (хвасталась), or even sometimes when she said nothing (а иногда ничего не говорила). 
Because she is my rose.
3. But he came back to his idea. 
"My life is very monotonous," the fox said. "I hunt chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike, and all the men are just alike. And, in consequence, I am a little bored. But if you tame me, it will be as if the sun came to shine on my life . I shall know the sound of a step that will be different from all the others. Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the ground. Yours will call me, like music, out of my burrow. And then look: you see the grain-fields down yonder? I do not eat bread. Wheat is of no use to me. The wheat fields have nothing to say to me. And that is sad. But you have hair that is the colour of gold. Think how wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! The grain, which is also golden, will bring me back the thought of you. And I shall love to listen to the wind in the wheat..." 
The fox gazed at the little prince, for a long time. 
"Please - tame me!" he said.
"I want to, very much," the little prince replied. "But I have not much time. I have friends to discover, and a great many things to understand."
"One only understands the things that one tames," said the fox. "Men have no more time to understand anything. They buy things all ready made at the shops. But there is no shop anywhere where one can buy friendship, and so men have no friends any more. If you want a friend, tame me..."
"What must I do, to tame you?" asked the little prince.
"You must be very patient," replied the fox. "First you will sit down at a little distance from me - like that - in the grass. I shall look at you out of the corner of my eye, and you will say nothing. Words are the source of misunderstandings. But you will sit a little closer to me, every day..." 
The next day the little prince came back. 
"It would have been better to come back at the same hour," said the fox. 
"If, for example, you come at four o'clock in the afternoon, then at three o'clock I shall begin to be happy. I shall feel happier and happier as the hour advances. At four o'clock, I shall already be worrying and jumping about. I shall show you how happy I am! But if you come at just any time, I shall never know at what hour my heart is to be ready to greet you... One must observe the proper rites..."
"What is a rite?" asked the little prince.
"Those also are actions too often neglected," said the fox. "They are what make one day different from other days, one hour from other hours. There is a rite, for example, among my hunters. Every Thursday they dance with the village girls. So Thursday is a wonderful day for me! I can take a walk as far as the vineyards. But if the hunters danced at just any time, every day would be like every other day, and I should never have any vacation at all." 
So the little prince tamed the fox. And when the hour of his departure drew near - "Ah," said the fox, "I shall cry."
"It is your own fault," said the little prince. "I never wished you any sort of harm; but you wanted me to tame you..."
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"But now you are going to cry!" said the little prince.
"Yes, that is so," said the fox.
"Then it has done you no good at all!"
"It has done me good," said the fox, "because of the color of the wheat fields." And then he added:
"Go and look again at the roses. You will understand now that yours is unique in all the world. Then come back to say goodbye to me, and I will make you a present of a secret." 
The little prince went away, to look again at the roses. 
"You are not at all like my rose," he said. "As yet you are nothing. No one has tamed you, and you have tamed no one. You are like my fox when I first knew him. He was only a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But I have made him my friend, and now he is unique in all the world." 
And the roses were very much embarrassed. 
"You are beautiful, but you are empty," he went on. "One could not die for you. To be sure, an ordinary passerby would think that my rose looked just like you - the rose that belongs to me. But in herself alone she is more important than all the hundreds of you other roses: because it is she that I have watered; because it is she that I have put under the glass globe; because it is she that I have sheltered behind the screen; because it is for her that I have killed the caterpillars (except the two or three that we saved to become butterflies); because it is she that I have listened to, when she grumbled, or boasted, or even sometimes when she said nothing. 
Because she is my rose.  
 
And he went back to meet the fox.
"Goodbye," he said.
"Goodbye," said the fox. "And now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye."
"What is essential is invisible to the eye," the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. "It is the time you have wasted for your rose that makes your rose so important."
"It is the time I have wasted for my rose - " said the little prince, so that he would be sure to remember.
"Men have forgotten this truth," said the fox. "But you must not forget it. You become responsible, forever, for what you have tamed. You are responsible for your rose..." 
"I am responsible for my rose," the little prince repeated, so that he would be sure to remember. 





